Fake news is false or misdirecting information introduced as news. 
Fake news frequently has the aim of harming the reputation of an individual, or through advertising revenue making money.
A kind of yellow press that are presented by Fake news deliberately misrepresents or spreads through traditional news media and recently online public media.
Fake news from the "Great Moon Hawks" published in 1835 has long existed. (Great Lunar Fraud, et al., 2017).
The term fake news basically denotes to misleading and regularly disturbing info in the appearance of related news.
However, on public media the usage of the term has developed and is now measured the same with the spread of misinformation. (Sharma, et al., 2019).
It is actually significant that, according to the trend of google, "fake news" gained major fame in Brazil in the middle of 2017 and 2018, but during October 2018 when presidential election held in Brazil its fame on the peck.
Allcott and Gentzkow (2017), characterize fake news as news that is composed to misdirect perusers yet can be confirmed to be misleading.
This type of interpretation increases the problem of who has skills and who has specialist to choose whether the news was deliberately written the audience to misrepresent.
If the statement of the news rights that news does not contain deliberately improper proofs, So the news should be considered fake news? If the proof is incorrect.
The basic statement is that fake news will be news with false details, while inspiration is a supplementary problem when fake news is discussing.
Not all false facts are spread deliberately; Some are delivered accidentally.
It is up to the researcher to decide for himself if he mistakenly considers the news to be the wrong news.
In current years, because of the growing trends of on line social networks, fake news is appearing and spread in large numbers for different political and marketable aims.
With false arguments, fake news can easily infect online internet users, that already had a huge impact on offline society.
During 2016 in presidential election of united states, about candidates’ fake news of different kind widely spread on social webs, which could have an important impact on the result of election, according to the report of post-election.
Movement on online social system accounts of fake news data about more than 41.8%, and also on old-style radio, television and print media.
The reliability of information in online social networks an important goal of improving to identify fake news in a timely manner, that is the main tasks, which is studied in this paper. (Alcott. H. and Gentzko. M., 2017).
At top, technology companies like twitter, google and Facebook have tried to address this particular worry. 
Solving these problems, organizations take parts in these was not much effective and contributors denied receiving the outcome associated with such sites of these increased traffics. 
The reader’s ability to relate the actual news was deteriorating by the users continuously correlate with sites of false information in which they participated (Aldwary, M. and Al-Salman R., 2011).
Fake news differs significantly from traditional suspicious information, such as spam in various aspects: (1) Effect on society: Spam commonly exists on exact review websites or personal emails and has a local effect on only a small audience. (2) These users are further enhanced by the audience's initiative to share and disseminate extensive information: the users on online social network search for receive instead of passively receiving spam emails. (3) Difficulty recognizing: Compared to regular messages abundantly (review websites or emails), usually spam is easier to identify, detecting fake news with false information is amazingly challenging, as other comparative news is not available, so it is necessary to gather compelling evidence and carefully investigate the facts (Jiawei Zhang, et al., 2019).
 Fake news idea is not a novel. 
Remarkably, the publishers used information which were false and misleading for their own interests because the idea was existed before even the advent of internet. 
With the beginning of internet, many customers began to leave the old-style media channels and use online media platforms to transmit information. (Chen and Conroy., 2015). 
The latter option not only allows users to access different journals in one session, but is also further faster and convenient. 
However, with the reclassified idea of fake news this improvement came as happy distributers utilized what is normally known as clickbait. 
Clickbait are phrases designed, when clicked on a link, are coordinated to a website page whose content is a lot of lower than their assumptions then draw in the consideration of clients. (Spicer and Lice, Dam Lies., 2018).
The point fake news automatic detection as a binary supervised arrangement problem created by most of these techniques. 
News is thus categorized into two categories (real or unreal news) and a dataset with characterized data is used to achieve optimal performance when the classifier is train and standardize. (Dwivedi and Wankhade., 2021; Zhou and Zafrani., 2020).
People on social media are spending more and more time, as the widespread use of smartphones which creates its access almost anywhere and anytime. 
In addition, they communicate through the comment chain, then through comments discussions, or just the Dislike and Like buttons with friends, family, and even complete unfamiliar person. 
As a result, for spreading news social media has become the main medium. 
According to journalism project of the Pew Research Center's (Shearer, et al., 2020). 
In 2020, 53% of American adults say they received “often” or “occasionally” news from social media, 54% users of Facebook and 59% users of Twitter regularly use the site for news. 
Notably, 59% of users said largely inaccurate the expected news those who received the news on social media.
The beginning of the World Wide Web (www) and the quick reception of web-based media platforms (like Facebook and Twitter) made ready for the dispersal of data that had never been seen before in mankind's set of experiences. 
Among further usage cases, news channels took advantage of the extensive use of public media platforms by giving their customers with up-to-date news in near real time. 
News evolved digitally from newspapers, tabloids, and magazines, for example, online news platforms, web journals, web-based entertainment channels, and other computerized media designs. (A. Douglas, 2006).
Customers find the latest news to get easy on their fingertips. 
Facebook references represent 70% of the traffic to the news site (J. Wang 2016). 
These current social media platforms are incredibly strong and helpful for their capacity to permit clients to talk about, consider and examine issues like majority rule government, schooling and wellbeing. 
But, such stages are typically utilized for economic gain from negative perspectives by certain elements (DMJ Lazer, et al., 2018; SA Garc´ıa, et al., 2020) and in other circumstances to create biased ideas, to change minds, and to be ironic or silly to spread. This case is generally well-known as fake news.
The improvement and fame of the Internet has made it possible for people to receive and deliver instant and ubiquitous news messages. 
Individuals presently utilize online media and cell phones to get news messages. (Chiang, Wu and Yang., 2019). 
Previously, news was made and appropriated through traditional news media like newspaper, magazines, TV, radio and letters.
The problem with fake news, the web, has existed for quite a long time, yet moderately couple of individuals are familiar the presence of fake news. 
Massive fake news came in 2016 election of the presidential in United States (Persily.2017). Starting around 2016, fake news has continuously turned into a thriving subject of research. Spreading of fake political news is a subject. 
Numerous researchers center their endeavors around different parts of fake news, like the sources of fake news, the prevalence of fake news, the social effect of fake news, the persuasive consequence of fake news, the credible elements of fake news and also finding fake news.
In the previous years, web-based media has become increasingly more in vogue for news use because of its simple accessibility, quick flow and minimal expense. 
However, web-based media also allows the widespread distribution of "fake news", that is, bulletin with misinformation. 
Fake news on web-based media can have huge negative social outcomes. 
Hence, in recent times the search for fake news on internet has develop a hopeful research zone which attract many people attentions. (Moin Khan, et al., 2020).
The authenticity of the data is an important part of its reliability. 
The fight against fake news types it incomparable to check the integrity and authenticity of social network data and the data use in the application layer. 
Leak of fake news is a waste of web assets and process. 
More, it represents a genuine threat to data uprightness or data integrity and the reliability of the provided services (De Oliveira et al., 2021).
Given the new consideration paid to the job of electronic media in the dispersal of misleading news about current social and political developments, it is essential to know exactly how audiences interact on social network sites (SNS) with misinformation. 
Fake news about current social or policy driven issues are circling via web-based entertainment at a gigantic rate. (Mehrdad and Anna, 2017). 
These unreal frauds - knowingly or unknowingly - mislead or misrepresent audience. 
Often, created these stories to effect public opinion, increase the political schema, or create misunderstanding and for online publishers can often be advantageous business (Brennan, 2017).
Fake news can mislead people in light of the fact that their foundations are utilizing web addresses and names, alike as legitimate news associations. 
There are additionally situations where bogus news is made, yet it can befuddle and misdirect the crowd (Corner, 2017). 
Many individuals consume the news and are educated about current political and social advancements through virtual media platforms and organizations (Allcott and Gentzko, 2017) it is frequently hard to recount to whether or not the stories are believable. 
Fake news comprises unreal data that can be checked. 
This prompts lies regarding explicit measurements in a nation or misrepresented costs of specific administrations for a country, which can cause distress for certain, nations like the Arab Spring. 
There are associations like the Crosscheck Project and the House of Commons, which are trying to address the problem as the journalists are responsible. 
But, their extension is so restricted on the grounds that they depend on manual recognition of human, a huge number of articles on the planet are either eliminated or distributed each moment, it can't be capable or possible in itself. 
Reliable automatic index ratings for the reliability of various producers and the system development.
In the other words, a few researcher characteristics the unplanned issue of fake news to the aftereffect of accidental activities like an educational shock or what happened in the earthquake case in Nepal (E. C. Tandoc et al 2016 and Radianti et al 2017). 
In 2020, widespread fake health news spread that threatened global health. 
The WHO gave an admonition toward the beginning of February 2020 that the incidence of Corona virus has prompted a gigantic 'infodemic' or flare-up of true and fake news that contains a lot of misinformation. 
The term "fake news" became popular in the year before the 2016 US presidential election, and since then it has become a common term in the public vocabulary, according to the Collins English dictionary and American Dialect society (ADS) being called the “word of the year” of 2017. (American Dialect society, 2018; Collins, 2017). 
Views differ on exactly what content should or should not be included in "Fake News" -Umbrella. 
But the most commonly used definition is that fake news is intentionally misinformation, intentionally used to spread false information or to misrepresent real events to push a particular story (Gelfert 2018), (Klein & Wueller 2017) and (Shu et al.., 2017).
The Internet has made a significant difference in different news that users collect. 
In the earlier customers depended on traditional mediums, for example TV and radio, which had generally not many and more settled wellsprings of information, nowadays' buyers need to oversee online sources of information, for instance, sites of social networking which license anyone to share content without "truth checking or publication judgment" (Alcott and Gentzko, 2017). 
Several concern that internet based sources might distribute mistaken data, but current it as authentic or "genuine" news. 
We record on Facebook how anti-vaccine groups spread deception to clients, and we concentrate on whether Facebook's prohibition on "bogus" news publicizing forestalls the spread of misdirecting or deceiving news on vaccines of childhood.
Approximately sixty percent (60%) of United States adults searching about health information on internet last year (Fox and Duggan, 2013). 
Online information for purchaser prosperity is "frequently inconsistent" and difficult for clients to survey. (Fu et al., 2016; Fahi et al., 2014). 
Studies prove however customers don't accurately confirm the responsibleness of welfare content on the net (Allam et al., 2014; Knapp et al., 2011; Kutner et al., 2006).
Plants are an essential aspect of all species' lives on Earth. 
The world is a full green planet as they supply fresh oxygen to breathe and minimize pollution by absorbing carbon dioxide. 
Plants are directly or indirectly responsible for our food source. 
They also protect a variety of different creatures. 
Plants that existed millions of years ago are also used to produce coal, natural gas, and gasoline. 
Plants are also a valuable source of medication. 
As a result, a thorough understanding of plants is required to investigate the plant's genetic link. 
According to Maarten, et al. total and acknowledged plant species number around 373,000, of which 309,312 are vascular plants and 296,383 are flowering plants". 
People generally used their leaves, stems, fruits, flowers, and other parts to identify plants.  
Many countries rely on agricultural products and allied businesses as their primary source of income. 
One of the most basic and crucial necessities for any country is the safety and security of agricultural produce. 
Pakistan, like other developing countries, has always faced problems of malnourishment. Malnutrition is strongly intertwined with achieving food security (agricultural sector in Pakistan). 
There are many different sorts of fruit, but peach is one of the most popular. 
The peach is high in antioxidant vitamin C and minerals including copper, manganese, calcium, magnesium, zinc, phosphorus, iron, and potassium (Krizhevsky,. 2012). 
Peach production has led to the financial wealth of developed countries while also playing a significant influence on the economic development of emerging nations (Otsu, 2016). 
Peach farming is an essential element of Pakistan agriculture and peach fruits are popular fruits consumed by millions of people worldwide. 
According to the Crop Reporting Service of KPK, Peshawar churn out 1,066 tonnes, Lower Dir 1,033 tonnes,  Malakand 1,190 tonnes, Buner 3,105 tonnes, Swat churn out 5,280 tonnes of peaches in 2018-2019, Mardan 2,825 tonnes and Upper Dir 1,917 tonnes. 3,374 tonnes were produced in all by the tribal district.
However, several diseases can attack peaches, including Bacterial spots, also known as Bacteriosis, and shot holes. 
This most severe disease affects many crops. 
A bacterial leaf spot is another name for a bacterial short hole in a leaf. 
Older nectarines and peaches are affected by this severe infection.
In general, because symptoms typically develop on the leaves first, the main sources for recognizing plants disease (Ebrahimi, et al. 2017). 
The "bacterium Xanthomonas Campestris pv. Pruni" causes peach leaf spot diseases. Bacterial spot-on peach crops induce fruit losses as well as general tree malaise due to repeated defoliation. 
This disease has the potential to destroy crops across an entire field, resulting in considerable crop lose of revenue, because the quality fruit would not be produced from it. 
As a result, early detection of this disease's infestation is critical to reduce pesticide use, prevent peach fruit loss, and avoid economic loss.  
Early detection of this fatal disease necessitates a routine professional assessment of the disease's severity (Martinelli, 2014). 
There is necessary to develop rapid and automated approaches for identifying plant diseases in crops since this is a labor-intensive process that does not always work well. An effective substitute for automatically identifying diseases from raw leaf pictures is image processing. 
There have been numerous attempts to identify the photo and use a particular classifier to sort the input leaf photos as sick or healthful.
Bacteriosis or short hole is a widespread ailment in the peach leaves. 
This ailment is caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. If this disease is not diagnosed early and correctly it will damage the leave by up to 80(%) and as a result, more than half of the leave will damage. 
To recognize this disease early and correctly, a lot of knowledge and expertise is required. On the other hand, a huge amount of researchers have studied the categorization of peach leaves using image processing methods, support vector machines, and various CNN models. 
While Bacteriosis is a disease for which very little research has been conducted. 
The classification of healthy and infected leaves helped the pathological expert detect the disease and provide a better and more timely cure for the infected leaf, thereby saving the field.
Bacterial leaf spot is a severe disease that affects peach trees. 
The leaf is the main source of disease diagnosis in a peach tree. 
The bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. causes the leaf spot or shot hole. 
This disease damage not only the tree but also severely affect the fruit production and the quality of peach fruit. 
Most people use leaves, flowers, stems, and fruit to identify diseases.
 Plant leaves, in particular, are significant to botanists since they have specific properties for various plant diseases. 
The bacteria Xanthomonas campestris pv may occasionally be counted and classified incorrectly by the manual analyzer. 
The accurate counting and classification of bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. 
through machine learning is a research issue. 
To precisely categorize the bacteriosis or short hole there must be introduced a diagnostics system that protects specific time and to detect several infected leaves. 
This is conceivable because of advances in machine learning in agriculture diagnosis, where techniques such as clustering, thresholding, and support vector machine have been used to improve the correctness of peach leaf classification. 
In this effort CNN models like Alexnet, LeNet . VGG 16, VGG 19 have been used to accurately classify the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv and also developed synthetic dataset of peach trees leaves . 
The dataset includes bacteriosis or shot hole and healthy images.
This study aims was address the challenge of Bacteriosis, also known as shot hole disease, in peach trees.    
To propose a model for classifying peach leaves into healthy and Bacteriosis classes and to compare the performance of the proposed model with AlexNet, LeNet, VGG16 and VGG19. 
To evaluate the performance of the proposed model based on, Precision, Accuracy, Recall , F-measure, Mean Square Error (MSE) loss and simulation time. 
To develop synthetic dataset of peach tree leaves including healthy and bacterial spot or short hole images
The recommended model, which is set on Bacterial spot or shot hole images, will be used in this research work. 
Bacterial spot is a common disease in many countries, including Pakistan where crop losses are high. 
The proposed work would likely help the botanists quickly diagnose the disease in the plant and high-quality fruit production.  
The Deep Convolution Neural Network approach for a bacterial spot or shot hole disease classification was to reduce crop losses.
The CNN model achieved a powerful outcome among the model.  
Pneumonia is the most common respiratory disease in adults and youngsters, virus and bacteria both can cause Pneumonia,common cause of bacterial Pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumonia (pneumococcus). 
A person requires a lot of expertise and experience to see it early and correctly. 
Many researchers have used image processing techniques to classify images. 
Support vector machine ( SVM),   CNN models like Alex net, VGG 16, VGG 19 and LeNet for classification of medical images to identify whether the disease is present. 
Pneumonia is a disease for which there has been minimal research. 
The classification of normal and Pneumonia X-ray images benefited the doctors differently. The classification of normal and Pneumonia X-ray images contributed a little by helping the doctors andexperts detect the disease and bring better and on-time cure to the patient.
Pneumonia disease affects the respiratory system, which is responsible for gas exchange in the body. 
Sometimes pneumonia disease leads to death if not diagnosed and treated correctly. 
Generally, diagnosis of pneumonia disease is made manually through x-ray images. 
There is an utmost need to accurately classify pneumonia X-rays images with higher accuracy. 
Classification of these x-ray images through machine learning by applying nature-inspired algorithms to enhance accuracy is a research issue. 
The advanced machine learning technology can help us to classify and diagnose Pneumonia more accurately. 
In this work CNN (convolutional neural network) models like Alexnet and LeNet will be used to classify Pneumonia accurately and normal from x-ray images. 
For optimization of the proposed model, different Nature-inspired optimization algorithms like Genetic algorithm and particle swarm optimization algorithm will be used to optimize the performance of the proposed model.
This study aims to address the challenge of pneumonia disease 
To propose a model for detecting pneumonia disease by classifying X-ray images into normal and infected classes by applying Alex net and LeNet CNN models.
To enhance the accuracy of the proposed model by applying nature-inspired optimization techniques like Genetic algorithm and Particle Swarm optimization algorithm (PSO).
To evaluate the performance of the proposed model based on precision, recall, accuracy and F-measure
The proposed model based on Pneumonia and normal x-ray images will be used in this research work. 
Pneumonia disease is common all over the world, particularly in underprivileged countries.
There is a considerable number of lives lost. 
A deep convolution neural network approach for the classification of normal and Pneumonia X-ray images will help doctors and skilled people detect or classify Pneumonia from chest X-ray images.
A deep convolution neural network algorithm is essential for classifying normal and Pneumonia X-ray images to reduce miss-diagnosis. 
Proposed CNN models have to resolve the less accurate and classified affected X-ray image. The suggested Alex Net and Lenet model is based on the CNN model that produced a decisive result.
The involvement of the computers in every field results into a huge creation of information, subsequently the need of storage grows very rapidly.
A vast quantity of data is processed and stored in everyday life by human who are associated to different fields of life. 
Different formats of data i.e., scientific data, bar graphs and pictures (please include all the names)are used to store the information. 
Now the gauges of data have now been expended to Terabytes. 
The raw data have to be changed to useful information for its profound effect and responsible decision making. 
The information stored in computer can be used in different variations i.e., performing certain tasks, typically problem solving. 
The data analysts used this information for forecasting to predict the future trends in a variety of fields (please include the fields)Storage, retrieval and transmission of the information using computers as a data processor has revolutionized communication. 
It benefits the data miner in aspect of special trends or pattern and can analyze the future easily. 
A Decision Tree (DT) is a tree that makes decisions on the basis of its nodes, branches, leaf nods, inner nodes and root nodes. 
Every node performs different functionalities via these nodes which are labeled with s specific tests on an attributewhich indicate these tests. 
Every branch shows the result of the test while every node holds a label of class. 
The top most node of the tree called the root node or parent node and the inner nodes are children nodes.
The subsequentDT indicates the idea about a computer in perspective of buying from a dealer. 
This concept shows that whether the customer wants to buy the computer or not. Every node indicates a specific test on the desired activity as one is mentioned about the computer and every class is represented by leaf node.
In machine learning, SVMs(Support Vector Machines) also support vector-networks) are directed learning models with related learning calculations that dissect information utilized for arrangement and relapse investigation. 
Given a lot of preparing models, each set apart as having a place with either of two classifications, a SVM preparing calculation assembles a model that doles out new guides to one classification or the other, making it a non-probabilistic parallel straight classifier (despite the fact that strategies, for example, Platt scaling exist to utilize SVM in a probabilistic characterization setting). 
A SVM model is a portrayal of the models as focuses in space, mapped with the goal that the instances of the different classifications are partitioned by an unmistakable hole that is as wide as could reasonably be expected. 
New models are then mapped into that equivalent space and anticipated to have a place with a class dependent on the side of the hole on which they fall.
A multilayer-perceptron (MLP) is a class of feed forward counterfeit neural system (ANN). 
The term MLP is utilized equivocally, once in a while freely to allude to any bolster forward ANN, once in a while carefully to allude to systems made out of different layers of perceptrons (with limit actuation); see § Terminology. 
Multilayer perceptrons are now and again informally alluded to as "vanilla" neural systems, particularly when they have a solitary concealed layer. 
A MLP comprises of in any event three layers of nodes: an information layer, a shrouded layer and a yield layer. 
Aside from the info nodes, every node is a neuron that uses a nonlinear initiation work. MLP uses a managed learning method got back to proliferation for preparing. 
Its different layers and non-straight enactment recognize MLP from a direct perceptron. It can recognize information that isn't straightly detachable.
The statistician use computer machines to manipulate the data conclude the hypothesis, which either be approved or disapproved. 
Different techniques i.e., Linear Regression, Nearest Neighbor and Chi-Square test are in use for the analysis of hypothesis and its related attributes. 
All the aforementioned techniques work well for less numbers of attributes, yet expensive in terms of time consumption when the number of attributes increased. 
The stored data can be made effective in forecasting for a variety of purpose i.e., better managerial choices, automatic handling and reporting of special occasions, risk analyses and audience handling. 
Data mining is a procedure which is widely used since it incorporates maximum attributes to sophisticatedly manipulate the data.
The artificial intelligence and machine learning has given a leverage to data mining. Machine learning is an appropriate field which deals in a desirable way with large amount of data and present reasonable results. 
Data mining procedures are primarily used to analyze the data and identify the relationship between the attributes, entities and subsequently build data models that allow domain experts to know the relationship between the classes and attributes. 
The merger of several technologies i.e., visualization, data management, machine learning and artificial intelligence, statistics leads to data mining
For the tasks i.e., associating entities or attributes, furcation of data sets, grouping of similar data and identifying glitches in the data, the data mining has been emerged as a strong field. 
The entire procedure of knowledge detection contains abstraction, cleansing of data, collection and applying data mining mechanisms’ and tools to validate and verify the find patterns, to refine the collection process and visualize the developed models. 
Data mining is the examining of huge amount of pre-stored data either in databases or in warehouse. 
The data is analyzed and observed in a different perspective to discover and understand the hidden patterns.
Data mining transfer the data into meaningful, compact abstract and useful form. 
It categorizes the data using by applying mathematical and statistical relation on different prospect. 
Hence data mining has the ability to transfer the data into understandable, novel and valid patterns. 
It also correlates the data by analyzing the patterns. 
Different names (write down all the names and change their order)
This process can find useful and consistent patterns from the existence data, relate the variables in a meaning full way, and further the result information can be applied to other data subsets for validation.
Data mining is a non-trivial way to extract useful pattern of data from the data warehouses. 
The data mining is a fruitful way to conclude valid and novel results from the data. These data resource are databases, image, and websites and so on.
 Data mining dig out the patterns from the data and further use it to new data subsets which intern validates these pattern. 
The steps involve in data mining is mention below.
Identify the Objective , Formulate Dataset 
Convert the data into the most suited format and use the algorithm needed 
Formulate a method to achieve the goals by using appropriate algorithms or combination of algorithms 
Analyze the output data and validate the results
Compare and conclude the result with the actual real results and forecast the required actions. 
For a process of effective data mining, its objectives must be clearly defined, result oriented in context of business. 
In term of business, the objectives are to identify the items, which are required by the customers to be sold all together.	
To formulate the dataset, it involves a series of steps selection of attributes, data cleansing and analyzing of data from the data sources. 
This process removes noise found in the data and its inconsistency. 
Before the data has been processed it has to be collected from different data warehouses, need to be integrated and would be transformed into a standard and compact arrangement. 
Here naming non-consistencies are resolves and data are transported into required design and format. 
The data is also loaded into data warehouse in obligatory.
 The selected models in data mining is depends upon the required objectives to be achieved. 
The models used to discover useful patterns among the data, Classification and clustering are the two important methods to be selected. 
Visual aids are easy to be understood. 
The resultant patterns are represented with appropriate visual aids i.e., pie graph, bar graphs and etc. 
The results concluded are used for the forecast in context of business; subsequently formulate effective strategies to improve the business. 
The datasets which mostly repeated in the same transaction can be identified by a method called frequent pattern mining and the datasets are called frequent pattern. 
For this a least amount maintains is situate and subsequently discover the collection of items whose support is larger than smallest amount support.  
The items which appear in the datasets are called frequent item set. 
To identify frequent items certain threshold is set, if the items appears more than the threshold set then it is identified as a set frequent items i.e., set of diary items such as milk and bread that appear repeatedly together in the pattern. 
The frequent items can be identified by association rules. 
These frequent items in turn are correlated with presence items sets to extract the rules. The importance of association rules in frequent pattern mining is to discover the patterns which appear in the transaction. 
These patterns help out to increase the business. 
The association rules are if-then-else rules and statement. 
The most popular algorithms which are used for the identifying frequent patterns are known as Apriori and FP Growth. 
The algorithm FIM can be segregated into three different categoriesthat are:(a) Apriori-based algorithms (Suknovicet al., 2005)in which the generation of the first candidats’ data set can be taken into account for further processing in data base for filtering frequent items from data set (b) FP-growth algorithms. 
The aforementioned algorithms perform their different functionalities based on the required data and the selection of appropriate data set in data base. 
Also these two algorithms works on the principal of divide and conquer rule in which the large problem is divided into small parts for better solution and the main differentiation between these two algorithms is the utilization in the given structure(Gaoet al., 2011).
The process of grouping the data sets which have identical characteristics is called clustering. These identical data set form class. 
When clustering technique takes place, in a result different clusters (groups) are made in which each class is called cluster. 
This is not a supervised learning because in this technique is class is not labeled with appropriate sign from which the clustering identification can be obtained clearly. 
This is used when huge amount of data is available which needs clustering for segregation of similar and non-similar classes of clusters.
The data-set which doesn’t suit in any cluster is called outlier. 
Thus this technique gently identifies the outlier data. The cluster has two significantfeatures. 
Maximum resemblances among the data sets of a particular cluster
Minimum resemblances between the data sets of dissimilar clusters
In the process of clustering a training dataset is present to train the cluster model. 
When the model is trained with the training data then a new dataset is presented before the model which is called test data. 
This test data is used to test the accurateness and reliability of the given model. 
Various techniques are in use for the clustering some of the methods are K-mean Neural Networks and SVM. 
Countless bunching definitions can be found in the writing, from easy to expand. 
The easiest definition is shared among all and incorporates one basic idea: the gathering of comparative information things into groups. 
Bunch examination is the association of an assortment of examples (generally spoke to as a vector of measurements, or a point in a multidimensional space) into groups dependent on comparability. 
It is essential to comprehend the distinction between bunching (unaided order) and discriminant investigation (regulated grouping). 
In regulated arrangement, we are given an assortment of named (pre-classified) designs; the issue is to name a recently experienced, yet unlabeled, design. Commonly, the given marked (preparing) designs are utilized to gain proficiency with the depictions of classes which thusly are utilized to name another example(Casagrandeet al., 2012). 
On account of bunching, the issue is to aggregate a given assortment of unlabeled examples into important groups. 
It could be said, marks are related with bunches likewise, however these classification names are information driven; that is, they are gotten exclusively from the information. Bunching is valuable in a few exploratory example investigation, gathering, basic leadership, and AI circumstances; including information mining, report recovery, picture division, and example grouping. 
In any case, in numerous such issues, there is minimal earlier data (e.g., factual models) accessible about the information, and the leader must make as barely any suspicions about the information as would be prudent. 
It is under these confinements that bunching system is especially fitting for the investigation of interrelationships among the information focuses to make an appraisal (maybe fundamental) of their structure. 
The expression "bunching" is utilized in a few research networks to portray techniques for gathering of unlabeled data. 
These people group have various wordings and presumptions for the parts of the bunching procedure and the settings in which grouping is utilized. 
Hence, we face an issue with respect to the extent of this review. 
The generation of a genuinely far reaching review would be a stupendous undertaking given the sheer mass of writing here. 
The availability of the review may likewise be flawed given the need to accommodate altogether different vocabularies and suspicions in regards to bunching in the different networks. 
The objective of this paper is to review the center ideas and methods in the huge subset of group examination with its underlying foundations in insights and choice hypothesis. Where proper, references will be made to key ideas and procedures emerging from bunching strategy in the AI and different networks(Casagrandeet al., 2012).	
Classification is a supervised learning scheme in which the classifications of different classes of the clusters are made. 
The label of the class is priori known. 
A model or function can be identified by the known class label. 
This function or model can identify and bifurcate datasets and the concept associated to those data sets. 
The new datasets with an unknown class labels can be identified by using the information of the known datasets. 
The model is first trained with the datasets of the known labels; later on datasets with unknown class labels are presented to the system to analyze the accuracy of the model in use. 
The technique which requires machine learning is called classical data mining technique. 
The datasets presented to this technique is based on predefined classes.Bayesian classification, K-Nearest Neighbor, Decision Tree ID3, Neural Network are the most common techniques used for classification. 
Pattern recognition is a technique which identifies regular events, trends and identical patterns in any of the database events or transactions. 
 These patterns are then analyzed and are used in the business context to improve the quality of the products. 
The cluster consists of different sizes of the patterns. 
These patterns are available in large databases. K-method and K-mean are the techniques most commonly used for the detection of those patterns.
Bayesian networks classify the datasets using probabilistic approach. 
The possibility is calculated in advance for a tuple in a given dataset. 
By using the previous calculated probability for the given new tuple with unknown label class the values of everytuple is calculated that possess the highest value. 
A subsequentpossibility is utilized to classify the data. 
The classification algorithm based on a greedy search technique is called DT. 
The DT is formed using top-down search technique. This method is utilized recursively to form a DT. 
For the construction of the tree it is very essential to know the entropy of the label class and its attributes. 
The information collected of attributes is then calculated with a class labels. 
The attributes with highest information gain will occupy the top node of the decision tree. 
This procedure is repeated in a top down method for the construction of the tree. Know rule can be extracted from the construct decision tree. 
This rule can be used in the prediction of the future.
The pi represents the probability of a sub attribute which belongs to class Ci of particular AI attribute. 
The example is more predictable for the high probability while the example has less chance when it results in high entropy. 
The entropy of every sub-attributes of a specificCi class can be calculated by the Equation 1.2.
Gain information is inversely proportion to the level of entrooy. 
Higher the entropy the information gain will be love and vice versa.
The procedure for creating tree is continuous till all the attributes are entirely sort out and added to the branches of the DT.
Using DT if then else rules are helpful to predict the future. 
Assessing and analyzing the students’ grades are valued for a learning classification in order to acquire thorough image of students. 
Though, teachers may predict student’s performance on the basis of grade by evaluating and examining his/her academic performance. 
The students’ performance may also be affected from social attributes like home atmosphere, parent’s education, job and many other activities. 
Many researchers have been carried out to predict the student’s education performance. Still it needs to identify the attributes to predict better the student’s educational performance. 
Therefore this research used some well-known algorithms to predict the attributes which can affect the student’s performance better. 
To predict the best attributes to improve the students’ performance by using classification models.
To compare the performance of Decision Tree, MLP and SVM in term of accuracy, MSE.
Education performance evaluation is important in growth and development of nation. This help to choose those factor that actually effect student performance. 
Most organization evaluates student’s performance on the basis of his/her grading. Final grading depends on course structure, assessments of quizzes, midterm exam, final and assignments.
The data mining provides technique to use nontrivial pattern and find out valid novel pattern for student performance prediction. 
This evaluation helps to maintain effective learning process and maintain student performance. 
By this evaluation a strategic plane can be develop to provide effective learning environment.
This thesis has many chapters that are organized in the following arrangement.
Chapter II contains the detail overview of related work in the field of Student performance evaluation by using web based educational classification, apriory, decision tree neural network classification.
Chapter III discussed different technique to determine best among them these techniques are decision tree, SVM and multilayer perceptron.
Chapter IV contains detail of all experiment and their result evaluation. Finally compare the result to find best technique for student data classification for their performance evaluation. 
Also discuss their represent results using table and graph.
Chapter V discuses summary, conclusion and future work and concludes the thesis of research.
Images processing a way to make particular actions on image to get a better image and abstract particular valuable information from it. 
It’s a kind of signal processing where input is an image and output is a processed an image or features / features related with that image. 
These days, processing of images is amongst quickly rising technologiess. 
It’s also  a field of main research in engineering disciplines and computers. 
Basically processing of images contains the following three stages: 
Capturing the image through image purchase toolss; 
Analyze and handle the image; 
The Output that can changed image or result report created after the analysis of image. 
I study two kinds of techniques of image processing that is digital and analogue image processing. 
Analog image processing is used for hard duplicates such as prints and photos. 
Image analysts uses basic elements of understanding at the same time using these visual methods. 
The digital’s image processing methods support handle the digital’s images by PCs. (K-Lahiri et al. 2002)
There are three common stages that total forms of data must be taken when using digital technology are processed, enhanced and displayed, removed information. 
In this lecture we will conversate about a small number of basic definitions such as image, digital image, and digital image processing. 
Altered causes of digital images will be discussed and examples will be delivered for each cause. 
The variety of processing images to a computer vision will be included in this talk.
 Lastly, we will talk about the achievement of images and different kinds of image sensors. Alongside with systematic and technologically developments, customers are strongly giving consideration to suitable electronic products. 
The hand-held devices are growing fashion and also all type’s applications, containing audio visual, recording occasions, surfing Internet, audio visual, creating telephone calls and the rest. (K-Lahiri et al. 2002)
Video compression involves reducing and eliminating repeated movie data hence a digital movie file be able to transmit and kept efficiently. 
Procedure includes apply algorithm on the source videos to make a compressed files it is to be transmitted or kept. 
When start compress file, opposite algorithm will be applying to make a video that displays exactly the similar contented as the actual source videos. 
The period it take is called compress, transmit, decode and show a file in literacy. 
The best progressive compressionn algorithm, greater than expectancy, given the similar processing power. 
A couple of algorithm which work combine are called video-codec (encoder--decoder). Video-codecs that control unique standards aren't generally companionable with one other; compress movie content by one method can’t be decomposed using another method. 
For example, MPEG 4 Part (2) decoder wasn’t comfortable with (H 264) encoder. (K-Lahiri et al. 2002). 
It is simple one algorithm can’t decrypt output of a different algorithms correctly but it’s likely to apply many unique algorithms in similar software and hardware, which are enable compressing several formatts.
Explosive development of a digital’s video contented after good devices. 
Internet takes triggered new interaction in a video handling technologies, which includes the power, improvement, examine, and combination digital’s video. 
The video handling is computational intensely and regularly gone with actual time or actual--time wants. 
For example, observation and checking system needs strongly analyzing video of many camera in actual time to detected the signal automatically unfamiliar occasions. 
The well-known todays directions, the constant development of functionaality and the speediness of video handling systems will be more likely allow new applicationss. (K-Lahiri et al. 2002). 
The solid computer area displayed by video algorithms, video processing are extremely desirable parallel processings. 
Video liability to show higher grades area in stage: what performs to tenth video frame Series does not intensely disturb the content of 1000 frames, and spaces: 
objects on the left side of a solo frame it don’t powerfully effect pixel value on right hand side. 
On such area make it probable to share video processings task to less interactive pieces that are fairly easy to one another processing. 
Moreover, that pieces sharing data to economics memory band extraction. (Cheng-wu et al 2001)
In our research we are processing the video through parallel programming on GPUs. 
The term ‘video’ refers to moving visual images which could be recorded, copied and broadcasted. 
Initially it was done through video recorders and video tapes but nowadays modern technology has enabled the computers to capture, store, perform different operations on videos and transmit it through a network. 
Different characteristics of a video stream  includes frame rate, Interlaced or progressive mode, Aspect ratio, Color space, bits per pixel, Video quality, Video compression methods. 
The frame rate indicates number of still images per second. (Cheng-wu et al 2001). 
The interlaced or progressive modes represent the two scanning methods for the video display. 
Aspect ratio depicts the video picture elements depending on the physical layout of the video screen. 
Color space indicates the color representation of a video pixels and the range of colors increases with the increase in number of bits per pixel. 
The bits per pixels can be reduced through chroma sub sampling as human eye is more sensitive to luma (brightness) than chroma (colors). 
In past the videos were not compressed, their size were so huge that computers were unable to play them. 
This made manufacturers’ think about reducing the video size leading to the concept of video compression. 
The quality of video without compression is high but the other advantages of compression make it crucial for the video processing. 
The storage and transmission of videos are the basic requirements of today’s digitized world which are impossible without compression of videos. 
Video compression technology reduces the bit rate by removing the redundant data and thus enabling the files to be stored and transmitted over the network. 
The video size is minimized with less or no bad effect on video quality. 
If the compression level is further increased, the video quality is more degraded. 
Different compression techniques have been introduced lately. 
Most of the organizations use the standard video compression techniques due to compatibility and inter-operability. 
The same compressed data needs to be decompressed at the receiving end for further use. (Dennis et al. 2009)
A video codec is software providing the ability to compress and de-compress the video files. 
The term ‘codec’ has two parts encode and decode. 
The encoder compresses the video data where as the decoder is responsible for the decompression or decoding of video data. 
Some codec has both encoding and decoding functions whereas some of the codes just include either of them. 
The compression process involves the encoding of the video at the sender end for storage and transmission over the network and then the reverse algorithm is applied at the receiving end to get the almost same video content as that of the original video. 
The time taken by the complete process i.e. compression, sending, decompression and receiving is known as latency and is high for advance compression algorithms. 
A codec involves both encoding and decoding algorithms. 
There are different video coding standards which are usually not compatible with each other. (Dennis et al. 2009) 
If a video is compressed with one coding standard, cannot de decompressed with the other coding standard. 
The output cannot directly be decoded if it’s encoded by another algorithm. 
Different encoding and decoding algorithms can possibly be combined into a single algorithm to support a variety of video formats. 
Also different algorithm uses different techniques for compression and de-compression which results in different bit-rates, quality and latency.
There are two basic types of compressions: 
Image compression
Video compression
Image compression technique reduces that redundant data which is not notable to the human eye inside a single frame. 
This is done through intra frame coding. 
The video compression algorithm uses inter frame algorithm in order to reduce the redundant information among sequence of frames. 
In this technique, current frame is compared with a reference frame and the difference of the pixels changed with respect to the reference frame is coded. 
So only the reference frame and the difference values are transmitted leaving behind the unchanged pixels. (Dennis et al. 2009)
Data can further be reduced through block based motion compensation which divides the current frame into macro-blocks and the new frame is predicted by matching the block with the reference frame. 
The position in the reference frame where the match is found is coded by the encoder as a motion vector. 
In inter prediction mode, each frame can be categorized into I frame, P frame and B frame. 
I-frame is the intra frame that doesn’t need any reference frame for decoding. The first frame of a sequence of frames is an I-frame which is needed for resynchronization in case any bits are damaged during transmission. 
P frame is the prediction inter frame which codes the frames by referring to the macro blocks of the early I or P frames.
The B frame is known as bi-predictive inter frame and has increased latency. It refers to earlier reference frame and the future frame. 
The encoded bit stream is decoded as frame by frame to retrieve the original video. 
Due the tremendous progress in the field of video codec, designing efficient coding algorithms for video compression continues to be a prolific area of research, due to the need for higher picture quality at lower data rates and algorithms which require less computational capabilities of the device. (quora, 2014)
There are different video coding standards. 
H.261 was the first video coding standard in the family of H.26x developed by the ITU-T. Later on MPEG-1 was formed from the improved version of JPEG and H.261. Modifications in MPEG-1 lead to a newer version of the video coding i.e. MPEG-2 which is broadly used as the format of digital television signals. 
MPEG-2 is also known as H.264/H.222. H.263 was presented as a standard for low-bit rate compressed videos by JVT (Joint Video Team) after combining and improving features of H.261, MPEG-1 and MPEG-2. 
Nowadays the latest H.264 is an advanced version of H.263. It is also referred as AVC or MPEG-4 part 10. 
It was presented by ITU-T (International Telecommunication Union) in partnership with MPEG. 
It is one of the latest and most common video coding standards for compression, recording, processing and transmission of High Definition videos and is widely used for Blue ray discs. 
H.264 offer 50% improved efficiency as compared to the previous formats and provides network friendly video representation. (Po-Chyi et al. 2017)
H.264/AVC is the advanced video coding standard developed by ITU-T Video Coding Experts Group in partnership with ISO/IEC Moving Picture Experts Group. 
H.264 is one of the latest standards that provide a very efficient video compression, network friendly video representation and improved rate-distortion efficiency. 
Advanced Video Coding (AVC) is based on hybrid block-based motion compensation and transform-coding methodology, but it has some additional advance features including tree structured motion compensation with luminance (y) block sizes of 16x16, 16x8, 8x16 and 8x8. 
The 8x8 sub-macro block can be further divided into partitions with block sizes of 8x4, 4x8 and 4x4. 
It supports motion-compensated prediction with multiple reference frames along with sub pixel accuracy up to quarter of a pixel (1/4 pixel), and it has an added de-blocking filter which is used to predict the pixels from the neighboring samples of already coded blocks. It uses a small block sizes (4x4) integer transform instead of conventional 8x8 discrete cosine transform which helps to reduce blocking artifacts in video frames. 
An efficient Context Adaptive Variable Length Coding mechanism is adapted for H.264 baseline profile. 
All these features of H.264 have improved the efficiency of video codec in terms of quality but its computational complexity makes its implementation difficult. (Po-Chyi et al. 2017)
The latest video compression standard, H.264/MPEG-4/AVC provides better rate-distortion performance and compression efficiency over all the previous video coding standards. 
However inclusion of many new coding techniques has drastically increased the computational complexity of the H.264 video codec, some of them are error-resilience and network friendly tools, which makes its implementation practically difficult and time consuming. (quora, 2014)
Green, orange, yellow and blue - all of which are true color, color or shade. 
Rainbow shows melting one hue into another, from red to violet, and all strands between. The hue means color and shade of color. 
Green is color, and turquoise looks both blue and green identify the colour quality, which hang on the top wavelength of the brightness or light.
Hue Saturation Lightness and Hue Saturation Value are two alternate demonstrations of the RGB colour model. 
Agreeing to this model, any colour is denoted by 3 numbers. 
The first number is hue, and its value range from 0 to 360 degrees. 
Computer programs that usage color model are known to use either the HSL or HSV color models. 
Certain programs will even uses both. 
The most commonly used color model is the HSV. 
For example, (quora, 2014)  Apple computer’s use the HSV color model for colour picker, while Microsoft use HSL. 
And the simple Paint program providing by Microsoft only use the HSL colour model, more latest photo editing software for example Adobe Photoshop advantage from using both colour models.
Explain how clean the colour is due to the emission spectrum or bandwidth of  light or bright spectrum the main (RGB) container that is often use for colour display mixtures luminance features and light chrominance. 
In a lot of application, it’s useful that a colour be defined separately in term of it brightness and color contented in order to ensure that the color signals are processed and transmitted more efficiently. 
Towards this aim, different three component colour co-ordinates has been develop, where 1 element reflect the luminance of other 2 are typical of sight and saturation. Such a coordinator is the YUV color space.
Why the image can compressed? The purpose is that we can say that relation in the middle of 1 pixel as well as a nearby pixel is higher, or the value of 1 pixel then a nearby pixel are very similar. 
When the relationship among pixels is decrease, we can use statistical properties and variable size code theory decrease the amount of storing. 
This image is the greatest key part of the compressionn algorithm; many related handling approaches are offered. The good known approaches are as follows:
Estimator coding  and Differentially Pulse Coding Modulations. 
It is a loss less coding process which means that decrypted view and real view have same value for each matching entity. 
KLT stands for Karhunen-Loeve Transforms and DCT stands for Discrete Cosine Transforms are two of the majority famous orthogonally transformations. 
The DCT made image compression standards like JPEG (Joint Photography Expert Group) is loss coding process which will outcome in particular detail damage and irreversible alteration. (quora, 2014)  
The key purpose of entropy coding to reach a lesser average size of image. 
EC assigns code words to the matching symbols agreeing to the likelihood of symbolss. 
In overall, entropy encoders are used to compresses symbols represented by equal length codes by modifying code words that are inversely proportional to the corresponding probability.
H.264/AVC video codec is the latest standard in a sequence of H.26X video coding standards.
It has the advantage over previous standards that it contains the number of new features that allow it to compress video much more efficiently and provides more flexibility for a wide range of applications and variety of network environments. 
Our input videos are in digital form composed of stream of images, called frames. 
We shall take their transform and compress them in which we exploit the temporal and spatial redundancy of image frames to predict the future frame from a reference frame using motion estimations.  
The encoding process of video is composed of following steps or blocks:
In this step, a high resolution video format is converted to a low resolution video format which is suitable for compression encoding at a low bit rate. 
Different filters are used for conversion of format in preprocessing step. 
YUV (Y is the luminance brightness component while U and V are the chrominance colour component and RGB are two commonly used formats. 
We shall use the videos in YUV format.
After preprocessing stage the video is coded through following are general steps for Hybrid video codec.
Dividing video frames into Blocks.
DCT/Integer transforms.
Quantization.
Encoding.
On receiving side the inverse process is carried out to reconstruct the video.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
In this step we will be implementing our code on parallel processing environments; we’ll implement it using CPUs as well as GPUs. 
A Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) is also known as Visual Processing Unit (VPU). 
It is an electronic circuit specially designed to frequently manipulate and alter memory to speed up the creation of images in a frame buffer used for output GPU is Graphical Processing Unit or a Specialized Processor having tens of cores or even more than that. Very high level of parallelism can be achieved using GPU, so the computational power can be dramatically increased. 
The GPU architecture consists of a GPU chip with multiple streaming multiprocessors which contains multiples of cuda cores. 
The basic unit of Cuda programming architecture is a thread which runs on a Cuda core. Different threads combine to form a thread block which runs on a SM. 
Different thread blocks in turn combine to form a grid which is executed on a GPU chip. Different types of memories are available in CUDA. 
The fastest on chip memory is the shared memory which can be shared between the threads of the same block. 
The global memory is an off chip memory which is available to all threads. (quora, 2014)
GPUs are widely used in embedded systems, personal computers, mobile phones, workstations, and game consoles. 
Modern GPUs manipulates computer graphics very efficiently. 
They are more affective due to highly parallel structures as compared to general-purpose CPUs, for algorithms as processing of large block of data is now done in parallel. 
In case of personal computers, a GPU can be found on a video card, or it can be present on the motherboard or in certain CPUs.
DCT is an ideal parallelizable algorithm. 
Cosine transform is taken in order to convert the signals into frequency domain. 
It is like Fourier transformation, while Fourier  transform has both sine and cosine components, DCT is composed of only cosine components and it expands the cosine series only. 
The main purpose of switching to frequency domain is the “energy compaction” which means that the most important and useful information is contained in low energy or low frequency signals so higher frequencies can be quantized or removed because that information cannot be perceived by human eyes, therefore we say that the overall energy of the signal has been reduced or compacted. (quora, 2014)
DCT and Quantization are important from compression point of view and has an important role in providing good video quality for low bit rate systems. 
Both these steps give rise to lossy compression of data. As in any video coding/compression algorithm, our ultimate goal is to de-correlate the data, reduce data redundancy and irrelevancy. 
“Redundancy” is basically the duplication of data elements while irrelevancy means the data in image whose absence cannot be perceived by human eyes or any other receiver. There are some basic objectives when it comes to video transformations that are: Eliminating the drift effects, Free and low gain transform and reducing memory bandwidth. 
The design of DCT is also adopted based on these objectives, i.e. the transform should be orthogonal, separable, low gain, have a strong de-correlating performance, perform the transforms in integer arithmetic, reduce the memory access and computation overhead. (quora, 2014)
In parallel processing, each thread operates on single pixel and each thread block computes an 8x8 image block. 
These blocks are grouped together in macro blocks and grid. 
These blocks can be processed independent of each other thus the video frames divided into blocks can be conveniently parallelized on any parallel architecture.  
The horizontal and vertical DCT is computed simultaneously by exploiting the property of separatabilty of DCT. 
CPU based implementation also uses this blocking scheme but in serial order while GPUs implement the same block in parallel, saving time and resources.
The  implementation of DCT consist of the first step i.e. dividing frame into non-overlapping 8x8 blocks, and then two dimensional DCT is computed in parallel for each block using the above DCT equations, but on GPU the processing on each pixel is done in parallel.
To evaluate the performance of serial and parallel DCT, we check certain parameters such as time ratio of both CPU and GPU based implementation and PSNR for the checking video quality and degradation factor. 
The main advantage of GPU based implementation is achieved through shared memory of threads and thread synchronization. 
Moreover DCT transformation provides high level of de-correlation of signals. This signifies that DCT is the major step in compression of video signals.
The next step in video coding is to quantize the coefficients obtained from DCT.  Quantization is assigning all possible discrete values to the finite set of discrete integers (coefficients of DCT). 
Quantization is lossy compression and it is a non-recoverable process. 
Different resolution and sizes of video sequences can be coded in different compression ratios and for this purpose; different video codecs hire different techniques and parameters. (Wiegand et al. 2003) 
One such parameter is the quantization matrix. 
The selection of quantization matrix plays significant role in video compression algorithm. But there is always a tradeoff between the video quality and rate at which video is compressed. 
In video codec quantization is always applied on the coefficients acquired through the discrete cosine transformation, DCT. 
Therefore we first take the DCT using its standard equation. 
The matrix is of the size equal to the number of DCT coefficients. 
The values contained in the matrix are called quantization steps, QSs. (Wiegand et al. 2003) 
And these values are optimized according to human visual system, HVS. 
Our eyes can only identify the variation in brightness, in a specific frequency range, we cannot perceive the strength of high brightness areas very accurately, and therefore the higher coefficients of DCT are down sampled by the QSs. 
Each coefficient is divided by a constant value in Q-matrix and then rounded off. In this way the information in high frequencies, which is not required, is either reduced or rounded to zero. 
Only low frequency information is retained for image restoration. 
This process is lossy and compressive. 
There are some standard matrices which can be used for quantization. 
Different matrices yield different levels of compression with the trade-off of video quality. The quality of the quantized video can be analyzed by different factors including mean square error (MSE), PSNR, SNR etc. 
These factors, video quality and compression ratio might also differ from image to image, even while keeping quantization matrix same. 
The rate of compression is determined by the number of non-zero coefficients after quantization step.
There are two types of quantization techniques: scalar quantization and Vector quantization.
Vector quantization the Quantization Parameter (QP) is taken as an input and is treated as a synchronous clock and reset signal. 
The quantization function calculates the result for a column in one clock cycle. (Wiegand et al. 2003) 
The quantization block in turn consists of three blocks and a shifter. 
First block is for computing MF from lookup table. 
The second block is multiplier block that receives MF and transformed vector as an input whereas the third block is the adder block that receives the multiplier result and computes the sum. 
The final block receives the sum and qbits and shifts the sum by qbits value. The time and power consumption for proposed architecture is less than previous designs. 
In scalar quantization a window relative to the size of Matrix is selected (usually 8x8), then for each window in frame, each pixel value is simply divided by the respective value in Qmatrix. 
This is how information is down-sampled. And high frequency information is eliminated which is not perceived by human visual system. 
Quantization in H.264 is also scalar and is done using multipliers and dividers. 
Simply divide the elements of matrix with quantization step. 
This process contributes to lossy compression as multiplication is not a standard matrix multiplication rather it is the multiplication of corresponding elements in matrices. 
The rate of compression is determined by the number of non-zero coefficients after quantization step.
Motion estimation is the process of determining motion vectors that describe the transformation from one 2D image to another. 
Motion estimation plays a crucial role in video coding and  it is the most complex and time consuming block. 
It takes almost half of the computations, and therefore, accelerating ME efficiency will significantly increase overall coding speed and efficiency.
 In earlier video codec algorithms which were implemented on GPU, there were different efficiency outcomes. 
In one earliest implementation, the GPU proved to be 12 times faster than CPU, but still memory latency was high, the resources of GPU were not utilized to its maximum. 
In another approach proposed by Zhou Jing, the coding efficiency of 50 times was achieved as compared to GPU; this approach of motion estimation took complete advantage of on-chip memory and registers, to decrease memory transfer latency. 
Different algorithms have been proposed in recent years. 
The most optimized algorithm is the one which supports variable block size search, maximum threads, minimum memory latency and also concurrent parallel reduction. (Wiegand et al. 2003)
The basic aim is to formulate an algorithm for the GPU implementation of ME and to introduce a technique that reduces the time over head taken by GPU and CPU communication, thus making the GPU implementation faster (depending on size and resolution of test videos). 
ME can be implemented on GPU using CUDA architecture. 
The SIMD architecture of CUDA enables it to perform fine grain parallelism (pixel level) using threads. 
These CUDA threads execute kernel function which is the basic computational unit. The memory spaces are separate for GPU (Global Memory) and CPU (Host Memory). 
So the data first needs to be copied to the GPU memory before its execution on GPU and the results are in turn copied from device (GPU) to host (CPU) Memory.  
In GPU implementation the independent blocks are identified and are processed on GPU as a kernel function. 
So the same operation is done on different data (pixels), which corresponds to SIMD architecture of CUDA. 
A block is a unit executed on kernel. 
Each block is a collection of threads that are processed in parallel whereas the collection of blocks forms a grid which is executes simultaneously. 
Number of blocks and threads depends on video resolution and the GPU specification. (Wiegand et al. 2003)
Entropy encoding is the last step in the video encoding process. 
It is the lossless block of the video compression procedure in which the motion estimated, transformed and quantized coefficients are encoded and compressed for transmission. There are many algorithms used for encoding. 
Some examples of encoding algorithms are Huffman coding, Arithmetic coding, CABAC (context adaptive binary arithmetic coding) and CAVALC (context adaptive variable length coding).  
H.264 uses CABAC; it is more efficient than CAVALC. 
Encoding is done in three steps: First image binarization is done through the process of thresholding (bin).  
Then this binary data is converted into bits through arithmetic coding, this is a compressive process and gives higher compression than Huffman coding. 
The last step is context selection, in which probability of each bin value is modeled. These steps are interdependent and cannot be processed in parallel conveniently. (Wiegand et al. 2003)
As stated earlier, a high level parallelism can be achieved through GPU computing when no data dependencies are involved, data dependencies bound the parallel processing.  
To implement the video codec on GPU, the arithmetic calculations of ME, DCT and quantization are passed on to GPU as these involve pixel level parallelism whereas variable length coding is processed on CPU as it involves sequential processing.
Encoding step is highly efficient for video compression but not highly parallelizable because it has higher level of data dependencies in form of feedback loops, the input of one step depends on the output of other, the tasks cannot be carried out in separate blocks, therefore this video coding block is not adequately parallelizable. 
This task is better left for CPU serial processing.
Video applications and transmission are very challenging mostly due to less capacity of the batteries of devices.Despite the tremendous progress in this area, video compression still a challenging research problem due to its computational needs and the requirement for higher image quality at lesser data rates. 
To analyze the compression process on single core, and multi-core gpus.
To reduce the time consumption in the proposed compression process.
To analyze the time variant area in our research.
Our aim is to present fully optimized H.264 video encoder to show its suitability for desktop and laptop. 
Also, the high computer difficulty and huge memory access bandwidth of H.264 / MPEG 4 AVC make it hard to implementing by old processor. 
Hence, the multi-processing and multithreading encrypting systems are hopeful results for proposal of H.264/AVC codec in real time applications. 
For this purpose we will use GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) based parallel architecture named CUDA (Computer Unified Device Architecture). 
Performance of video processing using GPU and CPU will also compared at the end.
Data mining (DM) is a cutting edge technique used to analyse massive data sets and helps in expansion of data and convert into a beneficial form and then apply it to daily life tasks. 
Trends and future courses can easily be predicted with the help of this technique, hence; it aids us to understand and apply it into useful and practical work. 
Tiring and exhausting business questions can be easily answered by data mining method. 
Data mining has a very established and defined role when it comes to its application to healthcare system. 
Majority of healthcare problems prevailed in healthcare systems are addressed and highlighted in a very systematic way and and answered are seeked to bring improvements. 
The healthcare element that we have focused here is a disease i.e. stroke. 
Stroke is a complex disease and analyzing the factors associated with it and using it to predict the fate of stroke disease is a very complicated process. 
A large and complex data is available on stroke disease but it is very difficult yo analyse using the former conventional methods. 
Such huge and complex data can easily elaborated by application of Data mining which can later be used in practical life. 
Data mining has been found to play a vast role healthcare system and proved to be of greater help in accurately diagnosing different diseases in a short period of time (Kaur and Singh, 2014)
Extracting new and beneficial knowledge from an expanded and large data is called Data mining. 
As time passes by more data is gathered and is available for analyzing and thus we see an increase in the application of data mining significantly. 
The foundation of KDD is dependent on Data mining and it consists of a number of steps to preprocess the data and results are generated.  
The fundamental function of Data ining is classification followed by association and futher followed by clustering (Jabbar et al., 2013)
Data mining first browses, then selects and later arranges huge datas that are processed by it. 
The whole research in the medical field dependents on it. 
Many form of hidden information has been revealed from huge datas with the help of data mining. 
Different approaches of information technology are followed to resolve different data mining problems. 
They include machine learning, data visualization, multi dimentional databases, and different forms of statistics like clustering, classification, hypothesis testing, regression etc (Aljumah et al., 2013).
At the time advances we see an increase in data collection and its storage from various sources. 
And when this data, which mostly is in the form of images, websites, texts, databases etc, is to be utilized to find useful information, we tend to the use of data mining. (Tan, 2006).
Follwing steps are involved in process of “The Knowledge discovery in databases (KDD)”.
During this segment of the process, samples are chosen from which we extract different datas, which later go through analysis to obtain useful information. 
Data for different tasks are gained from databases. 
This steps involes making the data more relaibale. 
Different steps of cleaining, integration, reduction and removing outliners from the available Data are taken in to considerations at this stage. 
Using summary operation or aggregation, Data transformation and merging it for mining is performed at this stage and the source data pattern is tansformed in to the target data. 
The transformed data goes through data mining techniques to reveal exciting patterens and gain knowledge. 
Methods like classification, association, clustering, correlation and patterns etc, are different parts of data mining.
It is a part of the post processing stage in Knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) that helps in revealing relationships in the said data and mined patterns. 
if extracted results doesn’t prove to be helpful, the whole process is restarted that makes KDD an interactive process.
Data size is shrinked by feature subset selection that removes the unassociated or unnecessary attributes. 
Feature subset selection serves the purpose of selecting the least number of attributes to give us maximum valid result that can be gained by utilizing all attributes.  
A condenced data when mined can give us extensive advantages i.e. the number of attributes can be decreased and different patteren are made easy to assemble and differentiate (Han et al., 2011).
This is a predefined method or technique. 
In this search method subset evaluation is made the basis for the evaluation of the potential subset attributes. 
Exhaustive Search, Genetic Search, Random Search are certain techniques that are included in the Base line search techniques. 
On the other hand in graph search, algorithms, such as Best First Search, are mostly involved.
Genetic Algorithms methods are used to optimized the work on population that include a candidate solution. 
Population is evaluated through four different levels i.e. Parent Selection, followed by Crossover, later going through mutation and in the end replacement. 
The role of Genetic algorithms in huge and complicated search spaces can not be overlooked, as it can point towards the high performance regions in those search spaces, however; their algorithms are specifically constructed with tuned parameters, so as to productive search behaviour.
It is also called as the “Pearson’s Chi-squared test”. 
This test is used for testing hyposthesis in case when chi squared distribution is observed in the sample distribution of the concerned test statistic. 
Chir squared test are often constructed on the basis of sample variance or squared errors. Chi squared distribution is followed when assumption on test statistic arre made on an independent normally distributed data. 
This also supported by Central Limit Theorem. 
The hypothesis can also be rejected with the help of this test proving the data sets are independent.
If the null hypothesis is true and the sample size is large enough, a chi squre test implies, that a chi-squared distribution can be approximated to sapmle distribution as closely as desired. 
A significant difference can also be found in both observed and expected frequencies using this test.
Han et al., (2011) in their book ‘Data Mining Concepts and Techniques’ various different data mining Methods
It is a process of constructing a design that allows us to classify a level of objects to predict its class tag or unknown value attributes of future objects (with an unknown class tag). 
With the help of  this process we propse a design that can effectively and easily forecast the class of those objects whose class label is known. 
Comparison and analysis of test data is performed  with training or sample data (with the class label formed in advance). 
Algorithms such as the the decision tree, Bayesian classification,  neural network, the nearest K-neighbor, etc. are applications in the classification (Han et al., 2011).
The import method closest neighbor rating for the first time at the beginning of the 1950s. It is also known as an algorithm k closest as lazy learning algorithm classification. 
What is a comparison between a particular example or test data and training data? 
The comparison is based on the agreement procedure.
 Training data also called training training, which is stored in the space pattern of N-dimensions, and the presence of a label class. 
The data sample is tested or evaluated and compared to the trained data set. 
When you are given an unknown data, then KNN classifier checks for a similar record or tuple that is trained in the dataset. 
The k-nearist classifier searches the closest record and puts a class record company closest to the missing test record. 
This is the neighbor closest to the anonymous tuple (Han et al., 2011).
For the new test instance that is unspecified, KNN looks for examples of data that is trained in the trained dataset and finds the nearest example of such a case that is not known. 
That instance is then made the k-nearest neighbors for that unspecified instance. 
Two steps are involed in KNN classifier. In the first step, it finds k-training records that are close to the trialed record or Tuple. 
The second phase involves the selection of most common instance of k-training the k-tested tuple (Gaur et al., 2015).
The tree diagram scheme determines statistical probability or behaviour. 
Every branch of the tree represents a feasible appearance or solution. 
Schematically, the tree diagram is used to determine the behavior or provide statistical probability. 
Each branch of the decision tree is possible solution, or appearance. 
The independent leaf node ism given a classification
Each division involved in property value
Individually node agrees to an attribute
Entropy is also an important factor, when we talk about obtaining information from data sets. 
It is defined with the help of statistical approach imputities in data sets. 
More occurance can be related to high entropy and if found to be easily predicted (Han et al., 2011). 
Learning that is not supervised is called clustering (Class tag is not specified) in which same objects are grouped in one single class. 
In this method, data objects are same in relation to the cluster and differ from other clusters. 
A good cluster represents two main main characteristic feature
High intra-class similarities 
Low inter-class similarities
There are number of various clustering methods available such as Density-Based clustering, Neural network, K-media, K-mean clustering methods(Han et al., 2011).
Association rules mining is the most benificail and helpful data mining technique to reveal the veiled and estimated patterns in huge quantity of data and is responsible for searching out correlations isolated data attribute in huge databases. 
It has made possible to discover intresting and relative relationships amongst the item sets. 
A clear example of this type of mining is market based analysis. 
This mining techniques has proved to be efficient in discovering association between the consumer’s response against an unrelated item in database. 
For instance, effect of sale of one item in market over the other item (Somkunwar, 2012).
These are actually the patterns that are persistently seen in databases. 
Frequent items are defined as the group of items have a support value higher than the minimum support value, e.g. milk and bread that are mostly observed together and repeatedly in a transaction data set are examples of frequent item set. 
Frequent items are searched out with help of association rules mining (Han et al., 2011).
In health care data mining is of great and beneficial importance. 
The inefficiencies of the system are critically and systematically analysed taking account of the data bases and policies can be developed to improve it and decrease cost of management of diseases. 
This technique is no considered as a necessity to further develop different walks of medical care system. 
The information obtained from applying data maining techniques to huge databases have significantly improved positively both decision taking and health care system (Shah and Jivani, 2013).
Techniques of data mining have proved very helpful to diagnosing different diseases. 
But still different organizations come acroos a lot of problem while trying to improve and provide the population with quality care. 
Providing people with low cost treatment and pointing out different problems that patients faces are the manin challenges. 
Data mining can be helpful in pointing out such problems and guide us to the development of a fair policy (Jabbar et al., 2013).
Insurers make use of data mining techniques to handle any kind of fraud  or mismanagement.
Stakeholders, along with patients find data mining useful in diagnosing and treatment of diseases. 
Huge and complicated data collection in healthcare during diagnosis and treatment, which is hard to comprehend without automated analysis.
Serious consequences may result due to a disease in which ischemia in the brain occurs that is caused by an obstruction or heamorrhage in brain tissues. 
The disease is know as stroke and have serious effects on neurological behaviour. 
The patient suffering from stroke may have sensory loss, memory loss, inabaility to learn, paralysis of one or both sides of the body, etc and eventually may result in death as well. Area of the brain involved in stroke affects the serverity of the above mentioned sings and symptom. 
It goes without saying that stroke a major factor in casing disability and death. 
17 million people presented with stroke in 2010 and out of them 5.9 million expired. Besides in the same year 33 million people worldwidely survided the stroke attaclk. 
Most of the survivors are living from hand to mouth as a result of symtoms of the disease and are considered a great challenge for the healthcare providers (Zhang et al., 2016).
The underdeveloped countries are still striving with the data regarding stroke and its effects on heathcare providers. 
Most of the patient present with memory problems. Besides due to increase in incidences of stroke, it has now become third  most common reason of death worldwide (Colak et al., 2015).
The disease can be listed in to two main groups.
Stroke due to Ichemia or Ischemic Stroke
Ischemia is decreased or no avalaibilty of blood to the tissues whci may be due to a clot. This may occur in brain and the Blood vessel to the brain may clog up. 
Stroke due to hemorrhage or Hemorrhagic Stroke
Hemmorrhage is for bleeding. 
The reason it is called heamorrhagic is because of bleeding in brain tissue, e.g. as in Berry aneurysm).
Stroke is great challenge for healthcare providers. 
Serious consequences may result due to a disease in which ischemia in the brain occurs that is caused by an obstruction or heamorrhage in brain tissues. 
The disease is know as stroke and have serious effects on neurological behaviour. 
The patient suffering from stroke may have depression,  weakness, sensory loss, memory loss, inabaility to learn, paralysis of one or both sides of the body, loss of emotions, confidence, etc and eventually may result in death as well. 
Area of the brain involved in stroke affects the serverity of the above mentioned sings and symptom. 
It goes without saying that stroke a major factor in casing disability and death. 
17 million people presented with stroke in 2010 and out of them 5.9 million expired. Besides in the same year 33 million people worldwidely survided the stroke attaclk. 
Most of the survivors are living from hand to mouth as a result of symtoms of the disease and are considered a great challenge for the healthcare providers (Zhang et al., 2016).
Data reveals that half deaths in developed countries are beacuae of heart diseases and stroke whereas 25% in developing countries.  
It is predicted that by 2020, every year more than 25 million patients will present with stroke which in fact will be considered more common cause of paralysis and death than infectious (Adnan et al., 2013).
In 2004, health policy make developed a plan for called National Action Plan (NAP) to prevent and control cardiac diseases and stroke but had no good results. 
Therefore; it now became the cry of the day to develop and data mining technique which can effectively and precisely forcast stroke disease in vulnerable patients so that to help the authorites and healthcare providers to formulate their policies accordingly to help the patients as well as to reduce the burdon on society.
To analyze data mining model that can efficiently and accurately predict  the stroke disease by using K-Nearest Neighbor and Decision Tree algorithms.
To compare results of Decision Tree and K-Nearest Neighbor on the basis of Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F-Measure.
To summarize the results using Post Processing techniques.
The model can be apllied to different fields of healthcare and the data achieved from it and may prove to be very useful in finding our results with greater accuracy. 
Also the results of this study may be applicable on other sets of data obtained in health care. 
It may also be applied to data from non-health departments, e.g. weather prediction etc. 
Information technology has proved itself in many variants, while from last two decades many improvements have been occurred in field of technology. 
With advent of time the complexity has been reduced with less time required in data processing (Nawi, et al., 2014). 
Artificial intelligence (AI) stems to ANN which is a strong procedure to solve complex and nonlinear problems. 
ANN is composed of attributes such as pattern recognition and training of data with help of processing units called nodes. 
These nodes mimic the learning functionality of human brain. It carries out the complex processing task such as clustering (Coppin, 2004), classification and forecasting (krasnopolsky et al., 2003). 
The complex patterns can be recognized by other various models via identifying the complex patterns based on the data provided. 
From the training data these models learn and that is the main objective of these models.
Amongst various machine learning methods, ANN is the best well-known technique used to offer services like classification to differentiate the data in different groups in logical manner. 
The classification technique of ANN is mostly used in data mining specially for sorting the hand layout datasets. 
For an instance classification technique is essential step which need to be done automatically (Chandra, 2011). 
The ANN is classified in to various types. 
The most well-known among the traditional technique is (FFNN) and (RNN). key difference between the structures of FFNN and RNN in terms of connections among their interconnecting nodes (Guler et al., 2005).
Due to the well know approximation capability therefore this study proposed Elman Neural Network (ENN). 
The ENN is develop by Elman (1990). 
This network is traditionally trained with the most renowned back propagation algorithm (BP) to find the matching pattern among the already known input and the output datasets. The BP algorithm used for their training is quite weak in finding the best solutions and less accurate in finding the matching pattern. 
It is also very keen to initial weights and biases for training the RNN or ANN. 
Starting with unsuitable weights may cause to stuck in local minima. 
However, to increase the slow learning process it is important to carefully select the initial weight values (Hyder, 2009) to converge to global minimum error function and never stay or fall in local minima (Ahmed et al., 2001, Jin et al., 2000, Nawi et al., 2011). 
The BPNN weight values for ENN training results in slow learning process and significantly get trapped in local minima (Kolen et al., 1991).
 In contrast to lower weights the larger weights result in premature saturation. 
Many Meta heuristics techniques have been found to solve the nonlinear optimization problems such as Bat algorithm (BA) Artificial Bee Colony algorithm (ABC) (Karaboga and Basturk, 2007, Yang 2010) . 
These techniques were used for finding the better optimal solution and have the capability of abdicating the sub optimal solution and accelerate the slow learning rate for convergence to the local optima; therefore, for the selection of best weight and biases values for back propagation and Elman neural network these algorithms are used (Ozturk and Karaboga, 2011).
Similarly, this research proposed a new optimized algorithm such as chicken swarm optimization (CSO) algorithm which is used to slow the problem of the ENN. 
This study is interested in data mining feild. 
In this new world of technology data mining is frequently used in various fields of science, technology and business, where large amount of data is present which it is evaluated. 
So, this research is going to discuss data mining briefly in the next section of this study.
The process of finding huge amount of data in a large database to recognize a pattern of valuable data is known as data mining. 
It is a novel and non- trivial method to recognize huge of amount of data set and classify them accordingly. 
Or it can also imply that data mining deal with the invention of novel information and facts from a bulk of data which improves the organization performance (Bharati and Ramageri, 2010). 
The Data mining technique has been employed in different fields such as drugs recovery, forensic, forecasting and now days in different field of engineering, medical economics etc. 
The data mining technique is also used to recover informational and important materials using data recovery options. 
Various tools like Classification, Clustering, Prediction and Neural Network are used for data mining.
Classification is a process to classify different data sets and which are logically similar sets. 
This is the most common data extraction process, which distributes aggregated data into predefined categories or categories for data collection to help make more difficult predictions and analyses. 
Classification is one of several ways to effectively analyze huge data sets. 
For this type of analysis fraud detection is particularly suitable. 
The function of the classification algorithm is to know how to access a set of end attributes. 
Many researchers carried out various types of classification models in their researches such as Neural Networks,“Classification Based on Associations, Bayesian Classification, decision tree induction, and Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Bharati and Ramageri, 2010)”.
In this type of data mining technique grouping different object or data classes based on similarity in different groups. 
The group can identify the process in which the idea of total propagation and correlation between data attributes is detected. 
The key distinction amongst the classification and clustering is that the classification is also be used on as efficient average, in place of group classification it is used as an external disclosure the reason that classification is expensive, i.e. to form a set of clients on the basis of the purchase model, to move sets with a related classification (Bharti and Ramageri, 2010).
There are many varieties of clustering techniques such as:
Partitioning methods
Model-based procedure
Hierarchical Agglomerative Methods
Grid-based methods
Density based methods 
Artificial intelligence in the field of prediction is the most commonly use data mining tool. 
On the base of past experience, the forecasting process in the future can also be predicted. In forecasting main concept is to provide ideas about what will happen in the future, such as stock prices, weather forecast, sales volume and so on. 
However, predictions may not necessarily be predicated accurately. 
Future plans are based on forecasts of future stock prices for specific commodities. 
There is no precise prediction in each case (Trandafili et al., 2012).
Therefore, various learning techniques like prediction classification and clustering are used. 
Among all these technologies, neural networks are well-known machine learning models to be discussed below.
In machine learning the most important method is artificial neural network. 
This is a logical technique that mimics neurological functions and the human cognitive system of the brain. 
Artificial neural network is established on the working principle of human brain function, because the structure of the human brain is composed of billions of neurons. 
Similarly, neurons are the basic units of artificial neural network which are connected to each other. 
Neurons process the data from input to output layer through hidden layer and help in training the ANN structure to perform computations such; as classification, clustering etc. (Deng et al., 2008) 
Artificial neural networks simulate the functions of the human brain, and training computationally complex calculations. 
But there is also a strong set of already defined learning programs which can adjust to new patterns, identify, save, and evaluate the features it gets. (Popescu, et al., 2009). 
Who has the ability to learn without prior knowledge of the data of the training input data, as well as examples of feeding it.
ANN are widely used in engineering fields such as weather forecasting, decision modeling, financial forecasting, health medicine, space exploration and control systems, (Krasnopolsky et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2008). 
ANN have a variety of structures. Among all these different ANN architectures, feed forward neural network (FFNN) is the most commonly used structure. 
The FFNN is also called Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). 
In FFNN the MLP is commonly used, that is demonstrated to give output on the basis of input (Haykin, 1994).”
The highly standard type of ANN architecture is MLP, mostly researchers use this type because of its simple architecture and it include effective set of predefined leaning techniques (Popescue et al., 2009). 
The MLP structure consist of one input and one or many hidden layers which are used for large set of applications (Fung, et al., 2005). 
The simple structure of MLP consist of input layer, hidden layer and output layer which is elaborated in detail in figure 1.1. 
The input layer receives inputs and then pass it on to hidden layer, where computation is performed on inputs received from input layer. 
Furthermore, the results are obtained at output layer. 
All these layers are connected via weights with the corresponding nodes in the next layer which are tuned as iterations proceed. 
The MLP is a supervised learning algorithm that select the weight values with the pre define input and target values. 
The output of the MLP is the contrast between obtained value and the target value which is given below.
Artificial neural networks structural design is composed of feed forward neural network and recurrent neural network which are briefly explained below. 
The most common type of ANN is FFNN. 
In this of FFNN the nodes of one layer is interconnect to the nodes in other layer. 
These nodes interlinked to the nodes ahead in one direction, and these nodes are not connected in the same layer. 
The process is done only in forward direction there is no feedback connection, in this structure. 
The structure of this type of ANN contains one input layer, one hidden layer and one output layer (Nawi et al., 2014). 
The simple structure of FFNN is shown below in the figure 1.2.
One more type of ANN is the (RNN). 
In this of type of ANN in which network has feedback connection to the previous or same layer nodes. 
RNN can be easily trained on temporal data fastly and easily. 
The structure of RNN is same as FFNN but the only difference is that the nodes in the same layer are interconnected. 
Moreover, the output obtained as a result of computations is used as input to previous layer (Wang et al., 2011). 
RNN has advantage over the FFNN on storing capability it can restrain the information in memory. 
RNN can be applied to various applications such as prediction in weather forecasting, pattern classification control, associative memories, optimization and forecasting generalization (Ubeyli et al., 2008). 
Furthermore, RNN has three types, and that is Elman, Fully RNN and Jorden. But ENN is the most frequently used design among these. 
The ENN has best training performance structure. 
Due to its best performance, many researchers use this structure for their studies. Similarly, this study also proposed this structure for their research study. 
Furthermore, the ENN is explain in detail in the next section 
The ENN is most commonly used type of the RNN. 
The main difference between in the ENN and FFNN is in the ENN there is feedback connection for its adjacent connection layer, while in FFNN there is no feedback connection. 
Similarly, in FFNN, the data is entered as input to the input layer in the network and this layer forward that data to the next layer that is hidden layer in one direction, which forward that data to the third layer that is output layer which gives the final results. 
While ENN network uses feedback connection in which every layer stores its data so that there should be a feedback connection between layers to get that store data as an input data. 
The ENN, which is set to feed forward the input data from input to the hidden layer. 
The feedback connection from the hidden layer to the additional layer which is called the context layer. 
All neurons from hidden layer are connected to the next context layer of the neuron. 
The context layer is the time delay input neuron in which all outputs of the hidden layer are stored for use as a network (Elman 1990). 
A copy of the hidden neuron output is received to the context layer node. particular neurons in the context layer get an output copy of each hidden node (Güler et al., 2005). The contextual neuron value is used as a time delay extra input for each neuron in the hidden layer. 
This is why this network contains a time-delayed open memory (Elman, 1990).
Therefore, in this study, three layers of ENN is used. 
The three-layer structure of ENN contains an input layer, a hidden or context layer, and an output layer. 
Every layer in the structure has its own index variable:
This structure uses the i-index value as the input layer neuron, while the hidden-layer nodes, the context layer and the output layer node values, uses the j-index, l, and k-index values. 
In this network, the input vector V propagate in the feed forward direction, connected with weight values W through hidden layer nodes. 
Equation (1.2) represents the feed forward connection of ENN from the input layer neuron to the hidden layer neuron
The representation of input numbers of neurons is denoted by n and deviation is denoted by B_j in these equations. 
In a simple Elman network structure, the input vector is similarly propagated from the input layer to the hidden layer by the weight value, but the hidden layer also combines the output of the hidden layer in the context layer with the activation of the previous state by additional repetition weights; Expressed in equation (1.4).
Among these equations, m is the number of "state" nodes. f is the hidden layer activation function, g is the output activation function, W_kj represents the weight from the hidden layer to the output layer neurons.
BP algorithm is the most frequently used training algorithm for ENN. 
This study will discuss the limitations of BP algorithm in the next section. 
This chapter will also discuss some modifications of the BP algorithm that were previously done. 
In addition to this research this chapter, also included some metaheuristic procedure, for example, chicken group optimization which is discuss in the coming section.
BP is the well know training algorithm for ENN. 
It has been effectively functional in some real-world issues, such as prediction, pattern recognition and classification, and clustering. 
However, there are many deficiencies to exiting BP that need to be resolved. 
Due to the use of gradient descent (GD) optimization techniques, the BP has some disadvantages, such as slow learning rate, and it easily falls into the local optimal solution of the error function, and it cannot find the best solution in the world cannot ensure that it meets the global minimum standards (“Bi, et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2004”).
Similarly, the convergence behavior of the traditional BP algorithm depends on the choice of network structure, as well as some initial parameters such as initial weights and deviations, which are used to convert network signals from one layer to another. 
The learning rate, momentum factor is used to accelerate network convergence, and the activation function used is the threshold. 
In order to overcome these shortcomings of the BP algorithm, researchers have proposed various numbers of learning algorithms in the past decades.
Another problem with the BP algorithm is that the activation function derivative (Trandafili et al. 2012) leads to premature saturation of neurons, resulting in slow convergence (XG Wang et al., 2004). 
The learning process is improved to avoid nerves during BP training. 
Meta-saturation, when we do not get our required signal in a network there is always a training process for each activation function for hidden neuron. 
By comparing the old BP algorithm and then new upgraded BP algorithm we can assume that the new upgraded BP algorithm have much better gain in the activation function that have higher convergence in the network than the old BP algorithm. 
Since the derivation of the sigmoidal activation function has a bell shape, which occurs in the error function of the traditional BP algorithm, when the output unit is close to 0 or 1 (Nazri et al., 2007), it causes the learning to converge slowly. 
(Xingbo and Pingxian, 2008) proposed a new activation function based on a standard sigmoid function using four tunable parameters. 
From the comparison of new upgraded BP algorithm and the old version of BP algorithm, the result indicates that the fresh upgraded BP algorithm has less error convergence than the old BP algorithm. 
The convergence ratio is 10 percent faster than the old version of BP algorithm and the convergence error is 1 percent less and the new style activation function. 
But BP still have the issue of slow convergence and local minimum even the BPNN algorithm has been improved. 
To overcome this issue of slow convergence and local minimum this study use hybridization technique for achieving better convergence which is discussed in the next section of research.
The combination of two research methods to work together is known as hybridization. Global research techniques, such as natural metaphors, are known to improve BPNN training (Nandy et al., 2012). 
With regard to MLP training, gradient methods such as BPNN are commonly used. BPNN is a first-class derived method of gradient origin. 
To solve this issue of slow convergence and local boundaries with different techniques, a universal search method is used to track the course of ENN training to intelligently adjust weights.
Therefore, this study proposes some known methods, such as the meta-heuristic algorithm. 
This approach includes exploration, intensive, mining, and diversification. Diversification means exploring the global search space to produce diversified solutions and strengthening means valuing local research. 
This process uses information found in the local search area of the current good solution. All global research methods use the distinction between regional studies and some random distribution rules. 
Random distribution is used to find the best solution from local search to global search. For that reason, entirely metaheuristic algorithms are suitable for over-all improvement.
CSO is an innovative natural inspiration algorithm developed by (Meng et al., 2014). This algorithm is similar to the normal behavior of chicken. 
The CSO algorithm is used to use chicken behavior. 
The CSO used three groups, and each group of chicks, roosters and mostly chickens are found. Chicken picking is based on the cost of fitness. 
Healthy chicken will follow chicken, similarly weak as chick. 
There is a collaborative relationship between the CSO algorithms and the other integration team, unchanged. Chicken trail their colleagues to order chicken. 
The chickens can steal good food in search. The chicks swim to find food around their mother. 
Most Giants chicken struggle to get food and become successful.
ENN is branch of ANN which is used in many applications such as classification, clustering and predication. 
With these positive attributes ENN have some drawbacks such as ENN is keen to initialize parameters such as initial weights, the smaller the value or large values can cause to stick it in local minima which make it not to converge to global optimal solution. large amount of research studies has been performed to improve the ENN so that it converges to global minima. 
Therefore, this study proposed a new CSO optimization technique to train the ENN and to overcome these problems.
The study is composed of following objective:
To develop a hybrid Chicken Swarm based Elman neural network learning technique so that it avoids local minima. 
To compare and evaluate the performance of the proposed technique with traditional techniques such as GANN, BPNN and ABCBP in term of accuracy and Mean Square Error using Iris and 7-Bit Parity datasets taken from UCI Machine Learning Repository.
This study mainly focuses on improving the learning rate as well accuracy of ENN technique together with CSO algorithm. 
However, the hybrid technique also improved the slow convergence and to avoid local minimum.
The main contribution of this research is.
This research proposed a new CSO integrated with ENN to improve the convergence speed and to avoid stuck on local minima.
This research will figure out the convergence rate and accuracy of the proposed   CSOENN algorithm as compared to BPNN, GANN and ABCBP using 7-bit parity and Iris data classification problem.
Complex systems are structures that are hard to understand, model, and prediction (incomplete). 
The term system usually refers to interconnected and interrelated parts (original or abstract), forming a complete whole. 
The fundamental principle of complex systems is that the action of individual components cannot determine their actions. 
Complex systems have the characteristics of multiple modules that can interact in several ways. 
Complex networks can be defined as networks that display connections, dependencies, and interactions between their components. 
Networks consist of nodes linked to nodes (vertices) and links (edges). 
From a mathematical and computer science perspective, complex networks are graphic data structures representing large and complex world systems (ambiguous sentence). 
There are several examples of complex networks, which can be found in every section of science. 
Mark Newman categorizes complex networks into technological networks, social networks, information networks, and biological networks [1,2]. 
Clustering is the distribution of information to group objects related to one another in same clusters and differs from the objects in other clusters [3]. 
Identifying a small number of data clusters will probably harm some information, but the data will be clarified (ambiguous sentence). 
It represents a data object through a small number of clusters and uses its clusters to model its data (ambiguous sentence). 
Cluster analysis is the arrangement of clusters based on the similarity of the patterns set (usually represented as a measuring vector or a point in multidimensional space) [4]. 
The word 'community' is one of the main features of complex networks.
A word group is a set of nodes in a graph with more internal ties to external alliances than the rest of the network[5]. 
The display screen patterns can be observed.  
is an especially valuable research subject for the analysis of complex networks (ambiguous sentence). 
In this way, several attempts have been made to build techniques that eliminate network structures from complex systems[6,7].
Fortunato in [8] thoroughly studied the strategies of group disclosure and grouped them into different categories. 
Although non-linear methods are specialized, most algorithms are separated into two main classes, namely: hierarchical clustering methods[9] and methods based on optimization[10] . 
In hierarchical clustering , the system is grouped into several groups representing a different part of the network at each level. 
In addition to the hierarchical clustering ,Techniques can be split into two groups based on how cluster trees are formed: divisive algorithms [7,11 ,13] and agglomerational algorithms [6,9,14]. 
For divisive methods, used as top-down approach, the graph is split into two groups in each cycle. 
This cycle continues till the clear mark of the cluster is removed. 
The clusters are then proportionally grouped into aggregate methods, if the similarity is adequate. 
In an optimization-based algorithm, group recognition is turned into an optimization problem in which the pre-determined aim is to find as many solutions as possible to the pre-characterized target work. 
Two examples of objective functions are the network modularity used in some algorithms[6,11,15], in addition to the cut requirements chosen by the spectral  methods[16, 17].
 Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are commonly used in complex systems to classify group structures [18, 19]. 
The genetic algorithm ( GA) has been used in other EA methods [18, 19, 20, 21] to the degree that the preferred EA category can be defined for group identification.
The new GA calculation has a number of focal points, such as parallel search.And certain conditions, e.g. a little convergence [22]. 
It has also been shown that GA can stand up to the ideal local solution and thus find a more optimal solution[21].
However, there are some issues with GA-based network recognition approaches, such as identifying smart network structures without previous knowledge and further enhancing diagnostic accuracy. 
AFSA (Artificial Fish swarm Algorithm) is a very good tracking algorithm.
This algorithm is explained by the complete evolution of the fish and its various social behavior.
As a part of the evolution of deliberate behavior, fish have been captured in order to preserve their presence and, if possible, to demonstrate responsible behavior. 
The quest for nutrition, success and risk management is part of the social process and collaborations will result in an engaging social process for all fishes at the meeting. 
This  algorithm has many attractions, including high conversion speed , reliability, internal failure control, and high accuracy. 
Standard modularity calculation is used in the proposed strategy to calculate the complexity of the discovered groups. 
Experiments on a synthetic and potentially known device of the real world, Examples such as American College Football show the potential of the SFSOA technique to accurately rank networks with better or higher outcomes than individual strategies.
Sports data is a popular topic for statisticians in current years. 
People who study to attract different data in many ballgames and conclusions based on their analysis. 
Football, known as the most popular sport on this planet , it is difficult to collect and organize data related to sport . 
Unlike basketball or football, where the existence of a single professional league (NBA and NFL), it is easy to record all, football is played on to consider the world with so many leagues and tournaments. 
Today, the presence of professional football statistics site may insofar statistical research in the field of football (Yuan, 2014).
Football (known as soccer name in many regions) is a team sport that is very popular in almost every country in the world. 
The process of selecting players for professional football teams is paramount in the quest for victory. 
So much so that a wrong choice can cost a football league, and even millions of dollars if the player does not show that the team's expectations. 
Traditionally, professional football makes use of a variety of sports psychology notes for evaluating players. 
There is no doubt that these evaluations are useful and are very useful when a team is winning football.  
However, this is only part of the big puzzle, trying to assess the relevance of a player for a team. 
The ability to select a set of appropriate equipment and provide effective training is essential to reach the top of team sports (Boon & Sierksma, 2003).
The method of selection of players and team building sports multi- player is a complex multi - objective problem with contradictory criteria. 
The selection of players in a team is each time a hard task with many dimensions. Coaches should be sent to a large number of qualitative and quantitative attributes in the selection of players. 
These attributes and skills of the various performance indicators players, players who combine , physical condition , psychological factors and injuries among others include (Arnason et al., 2004). 
There has been tremendous growth in the field of data mining sports in recent years. 
This was followed by data mining experts using the concept of data mining. Since the domain of sport has such a huge, vast sports data and statistics, reports, etc. 
The information provided in the activity of the individual players, the championships that the team played and won, the decision of the coaching/managerial made in the past and possibly some other game-based events (Linde et al., 2014).
In this research rising players in the future are predicting who are better for team performance. 
The best player selection is very important for the team, to enhance the performance of teams, to find out those players who are better for team performance. 
Selection of best players will be easy for coaches and managers after this research. 
There is valuable information that is not seen in the data. 
Therefore, they can be processed and logic important data these are often suppressed and intact. 
It is almost impossible for people or groups with limited opportunities - technology in particular - to find and get an idea of the data.
Data mining of large volumes of data to extract information or for mining (Han and Kamber 2006). 
Data mining is the extraction of previously unknown and potentially useful information and data (Lan et al., 2001). 
Data mining is the process of artificial intelligence, machine learning and statistical methods used to extract information and to identify and acquire knowledge. (Turban et al., 2004). 
Using the tools and data mining techniques to extract knowledge from huge amounts of data. 
Data mining practices countless data investigation tools to find patterns and relations in data that can be used to make correct forecasts thoughtful. 
Data mining is the procedure by means of non-natural intelligence and machine learning of statistical to mine useful information and the identification and acquisition of knowledge from large databases. 
There are several descriptions for data mining, but all these descriptions offer a general agreement that the analysis of the knowledge discovery and data information big quantity of documentation and analysis of the data model to the data of interest is to find possible rules.
In short, data mining refers to the extraction and production of information from large amounts of data. 
For example, data mining should be called more appropriately extracting knowledge from data. 
However, data extraction, a specific period of time in order to describe the process is a small number of the many resources valuable documents. 
There are many other terms analysis that are comparable or slightly different important data, such as data mining, database knowledge, knowledge extraction, data model, data archeology dredging, and data. 
Many people refer to data mining as a synonym for the expression of another nation, "knowledge discovery in databases" or KDD. 
On the other hand, others believe that production only as a step important in the process of knowledge discovery in databases. 
Data discovery knowledge is represented as an iterative process. 
It is an iterative procedure. 
After processing, the information is presented to the driver can improve the estimation of events, the additional production can develop new information to be designated or more changes or new data sources can be combined to obtain other , relevant results.
Data cleaning as well-known phase in which the blare data and the unrelated data is detached from the gathering. 
Data integration step, various data bases are often dissimilar, may be united in a mutual source. 
Data selection phase, the data related with the investigation and decided from data gathering.
Data transformation is also called data integration, a stage in which the designated data develops appropriate for the progression of mining methods.
Data mining is the serious stage applying bright techniques to mine potentially useful values.
Pattern evaluation phase, harshly signifying the interesting designs determined based on the knowledge of these trials.
Knowledge representation is the final stage in which the discovered knowledge. 
It is shown to the user. 
This is an important step uses visualization techniques to help users understand and interpret the results of data analysis.
It is common to combine some of these steps together. 
For example, cleaning the data and data integration may be carried together as a pretreatment phase to create a data warehouse. 
Data Selection and Data Transformation can also be combined where Data integration is the result of choice, or as in the case of the data warehouses selection becomes transformed data.
The data-mining functionalities and the variety-of-knowledge they discover are briefly presented in the following-list they found that the following list briefly describes the functions and various data-mining knowledge (Han et al., 2001).
The data can be associated with classes.
 For example, shops-selling items All-Electronics categories, including computers and printers, including the concept of a substantial increase in customer spending, increased inflow of tourism spending budget. 
This could describe most useful categories and concepts in a simple, accurate and concise terms. 
Description this class is the class description or concept. 
These descriptions may be (1) the information characterized by a synthesis of the class studied the general data (often referred to as the target class) (which can be described as (a) a summary of research data on the data type (usually called characterized as a derived class destination) as a whole) or (2) the discrimination data object with a class or a group of class, or (3) together with the characterization data and discrimination. 
Attribute given an overview of the general characteristics or attributes of the data class destination. 
For the class of user data are usually collected with a database-query. 
For-example, learning from the sale of software-products increased 10% over the same period last year feature, you can ask to collect data on these products that perform SQL. The actual data collection and qualitative methods. 
For example, according to the OLAP cube data synthesis slip, the user can be used to make data and measurement control. 
It is used in the polymerization phase, and interaction with untreated detection method attribute data user-oriented features. 
Output characteristics data may be included in various-forms. 
Examples include pie-charts, histograms, curves, multidimensional-data cubes and multi-dimensional tables, including-crosstabs (Han and Kamber 2006).
Data authentication is a common feature of these objects with an object class label or title contrasting ensemble of general characteristics were compared. 
Goals and contrast levels can be defined by-the-user, and the corresponding data objects-retrieved from the search-database. 
For example, the general characteristics of the software product to compare sales last year rose 10 percent to at least 30% of those sales declined from a year earlier a method for discriminating data is similar to those used for typical data transmission. 
For the form of the screen is similar, although the explanation should include comparative discriminatory measures, targets and help distinguish contrast classes. Referenced standard form of discrimination described expression, such legislation is discriminatory. 
Users should be able to describe the process proceeds to the typical and prudent (Han and Kamber 2006).
Estimating correlation analysis, or between a combination of a large number of data, and mobile data. 
Given that the collection and storage of data attributes, people are gradually attentive in mining association rules. 
With the large number of commercial transactions also they have an interesting relationship can help the decision-making process in many companies (Han and Kamber 2006).
The difference is that in the classification and prediction, in which classes, analysis of data points under a set of data objects, without consulting with the label of the famous class. 
In general, no class labels of training data as it is known from the beginning. Clustering can be used for such labels. 
These objects according to the similarity or minimized the principle of intra - group maximization and grouped between clusters. 
This means that each group of objects with a different group, but compared with the group with high affinity to the different nature of the object. 
Each group can be considered as a class of objects that can be obtained by forming the line. 
Pool contribute to the formation of the format shown in the class hierarchy, in which the set of similar activities (Han and Kamber 2006).
Analysis of data model development and describes the objects, their behavior changes over time patterns or trends. 
Although the main function of which may include a characterization, discrimination , association , classification , or time associated with the packet data , which includes data analysis or modeling of time series based on the similarity of the frequency and sequence analysis of the data(Han and Kamber 2006).
Classification is the discovery of a series of concept descriptions and specific data format, or can model for predicting the class of the object class treatment standard label (or function) is known. 
The resulting model is based on analysis of all training-data. 
Rules, decision trees, mathematical formulas, or a neural network - to represent the resulting model can be in various forms, such as classification (IF-THEN). 
A decision tree is similar to a tree structure of a flowchart where each node is a test-parameter, each branch represents a test result, tree leaves is a distribution of the class or class. 
Decision trees can be easily converted to the classification rules. A neural-network is a group of different kinds of objects to be trained to distinguish linear threshold units. 
This can be used to predict the class-label data objects. 
It can be expected in many applications, and some value is missing any labels class or inaccessible data. 
When the expected value of the digital data, commonly referred to as predictive this is usually done. 
Although predictions can be made with the expected value and the data type variable prediction is generally limited to the prediction, therefore, different labels. 
Identification of available data to predict trends uniform distribution. 
They may need to correct the analysis, which attempts to determine the properties before classification or classification does not contribute to the process of prediction and prognosis (Han and Kamber 2006).
Mining in many disciplines, according to the different activities; Data-mining can be divided into associations, clustering, prediction, classification, sequence mode and the like - time series. 
It depends to explore in a couple of ways; Data mining can be divided into, neural networks, statistical machine-learning and database. 
In static details, such as regression-analysis, discriminant-analysis, cluster and the like; Neural-networks can be as a feedforward neural-network is divided into before and more details of self- organizing neural network; machine learning, which can be divided into more details, such as inductive learning, learning the key technology in the case of the database and the genetic algorithm is a multidimensional. 
There is no method of exploitation that can address all needs. For a difficult course, characteristics of the data to the choice of instruments. 
The next step, as a rule, performs some basic techniques, including naive Bayes and decision tree. Mining method cannot satisfy all needs. 
For a particular problem, the characteristic data of influence on the selection of tools. Second, as a rule, a number of basic techniques is performed, including decision trees and Naive Bayes.
Bayes classification indicates supervised learning methods and statistical methods for classification. 
Suppose a potential probabilistic model, which allows us to capture the uncertainty about the fundamental criterion for determining the probability of outcomes model. 
You can diagnose and solve the problem of predictability. 
This classification Thomas Bayes (1702-1761), who became famous Bayes theorem. Algorithm Bayesian classification provides a practical and knowledge data and observation can combine learning. 
Naive Bayes classifier provides understanding and evaluation of many learning algorithms, a useful point of view. 
It is assumed explicitly estimates the probability of this robust for data input noise.
A Bayesian-classifier is based on strong (Naive) independence hypothesis using Bayes theorem (Bayesian statistics) a simple probabilistic classification. 
For potential probabilistic model is needed more descriptive term "independent film mode" is simple Bayesian classifier is based on a particular characteristic of the class (or absence) is independent of the presence of other features (or lack thereof). 
Therefore, the result can be considered as a block, such as red, round, and about 4 diameter. 
Although these functions are dependent on each other or in the presence of other features, Naive Bayes classifier once all these properties without the possibility of these fruits is the apple. 
Depending on the exact nature of the probabilistic model, naive Bayes classifier can be very. 
In many practical applications, Naive Bayes estimate model parameters using the maximum likelihood method; In other words, people cannot work with the Bayesian model believe or with the help of a Bayesian probability Bayesian methods.
 Despite their naive design, apparently simplistic hypothesis Bayesian classifier in many complex real-world situation is very effective. 
In 2004, the classification Bayesian analysis shows that it is not clearly unreasonable Naive Bayes classifier effectiveness for a while (Zhang et al., 2004). 
However, compared with 2006 in general different classification shows that the Bayesian classification to improve its reach current methods, such as trees or forests random (Caruana et al., 2006). 
An advantage of the Bayesian classifier is that the estimate only a small amount of training data used for classification (means and variances parameters variables). 
Since the argument is expected, it will be determined, instead of the full covariance matrix for each only used to change variables. 
Bayes theorem after a way to calculate the posterior probability P (C | X) and P (C), P (X) and P (X | C) Bayesian classifier has an expected value effect. 
At one level (X), (C), independently of other prediction values. 
This hypothesis is called class conditional (Han et al., 2001).
Schematically, the tree diagram is used to determine the behavior or provide statistical probability. 
Each branch of the decision tree is a possible solution, or appearance. 
It shows a tree structure, and the use of branches each version show cause to the next one embodiment, this mutually exclusive.
Individually node agrees to an attribute
Each division involved in property value
The independent leaf node is given a classification
Decision-trees represent an interruption of conjunctions of constraints on the values of the event attributes. 
Match of each pad at the root of the tree leaves is similar tests conjunctions properties (classification rules).
The tree itself of this disjoint of conjunctions (classification rule).
In order to obtain information to define precisely, to start defining entropy. 
Entropy is determined by statistical properties of any of the embodiments set of impurities. 
Examples of high entropy means more equal probability of occurrence (it is not easy to predict (Han and Kamber 2006).
The different schemes/models have been designed for either team ranking or player ranking. 
There is no such scheme/model that can predict a new player whether he/she could be a rising player in the future or not. 
This is the key for team managers and coaches select the best players. 
This is related to the cost and performance of the team. 
The best choice for the team players is very important to enhance the performance of the team, to find out those players who are better for team performance. 
In this research rising player found in a football team by using classification models.
To analyze a model that can efficiently and accurately predict the rising star by using naïve-Bayesian and decision-tree.
To compute and compare the results of applied classifiers on the basis of Accuracy, Recall, F-Measure and Precision.
To test the performance of the proposed models on football player data set.
Sentiment analysis can also term as opinion mining is the fastest rising field of Text mining and Natural Language Processing (NLP) which come under Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
This field of sentiment analysis inspired from the human behavior of decision making by asking family or friends and consultation about their views in daily life. 
For example purchasing a product, perceiving public respond about a service or specific law, public response observing about a policy approved by government and political reviews during elections.
The use of online resources for opinion sharing on social media, for example news, sites, review blogs, has greatly facilitated the process of decision making of several parties for example governments, customers and companies. 
In different local and regional languages along with English a huge volume of opinionated data is entered daily by using the World Wide Web over the internet. 
These regional and local languages are observed as poor resource languages as data and tools are hardly available as compared to the English language. 
Developing sentiment analyzer is a challenging task for such resource poor languages (Liu, 2012).
Data mining is a technique to mine valuable information from massive amount of dataset automatically. 
Data mining is a stage in the Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) process. 
The aim of the KDD process is to mine knowledge from data in the context of huge databases i.e. Data warehouse. 
To produce a specific enumeration of patterns or models over the data the process of KDD apply data analysis and discovery algorithms. 
Data cleaning is the first step of KDD process to remove all the inconsistent and noisy data from collection of data.
To organize Missing values cleaning step is used.
Removal of noise or outliers.
Cleaning Planned for handling missing data fields.
Cleaning step remove noisy data, where noise is a variance or random error.
Data integration step combined several data sources together. Combine heterogeneous data from several sources in a collective source i.e. Data Warehouse.
This step using Data-Migration tools.
Data-integration step using Extract-Load-Transformation (ETL) process.
Data integration using Data Synchronization tools.
Data selection is the next step of KDD process in which data applicable to the analysis task is recovered and decided from the database. 
Data-selection using Neural network.
Data-selection using Decision Trees. 
Data-selection using Naive bayes.
Data-selection using Regression, Clustering etc.
This step is defined as the method of converting data into suitable form for mining to perform operation aggregation or summary.
Following are the two step of data transformation process:
Data Mapping: Transfer elements from source base to target to capture transformations.
Code generation: Making of the real transformation program.
Data mining is a known technique, and applied data mining algorithm in order to extract useful data patterns.
Relevant data Task transforms into patterns.
Decides determination of model using characterization or classification.
In this step data patterns are recognized based on some interesting measures. 
Strictly increasing patterns are identified by pattern Evaluation to representing knowledge based on given measures.
These steps discover the interestingness score of each individual pattern.
To make data understandable by user this step Uses Visualization and summarization techniques.
Generally in this step, many knowledge represented techniques are used to represent knowledge to the user. In this step visualization tools are used to represent data mining result.
This step Generate reports.
Create tables.
Create classification rules, characterization rules, discriminant rules, etc.
The Pashto language belonging to Indo European group of languages and it come directly from the branch of Eastern Iranian language.
the Pashto language mostly spoken in Afghanistan and declared the national language of Afghanistan in 1936, and Pashto language is the second largest regional language of Pakistan, mostly spoken in the two provinces of Pakistan Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan. 
The total numbers of Pashto speakers over the world are estimated 50 to 60 million1. 
Poetry and traditional folklore Pashto language was becoming very common during the 17the century1. 
The Pashto language literature exists in different fields like religion, poetry, culture, history and biography. 
In the field of modern technology, this language got a little attention due to lesser economic and political importance, Such as text analysis, speech recognition, computer translation etc.
Websites of Pashto language are becoming popular steadily, even though for corpus construction these websites cannot be used, because a huge amount of electronic text is needed for corpus construction. 
Unfortunately mostly the user posted the data in the image/graphics form which is not extractable i.e. gif or other image formats, to display Pashto text.  
We need a sentiment annotated lexicon of Pashto sentiment words for lexicon-based sentiment analysis. 
Unfortunately There are no publicly available sentiments lexicons for the Pashto Language or even developed to date. 
Therefore, from beginning to modeling and then we have employment of lexicon to handle this challenging task.  
Pashto language is context sensitive in term of orthography. 
To comprehend sentiment analysis, first we have to clarify what is sentiment itself? 
Mostly sentiments are the same as emotion, opinions, or idea based on a feeling about a situation, or a way of thinking about something and the sentiment are focused mainly on attitudes and opinions in a place of facts; this is why sentiments are really subjective. 
Though, some causes refer to “feeling” as a usual reaction to pain, attraction, repulsion or pleasure, while sentiment suggests an emotion motivated by an opinion or perception.
Sentiment or Opinion apparent in sentence comes in two types: implicit sentiment where the text suggests an opinion, for example, “The mobile broke in three days” and explicit sentiment where the subjective sentence openly give an opinion, for example, “This mobile is great”, Most of the researcher focuses on explicit sentiment up to now, as it is the easier one to evaluate the explicit sentiment.
Sentiment Analysis or opinion mining refers to text analysis and natural language processing to classify the user’s sentiment polarity in a piece of text. 
Sentiment analysis determines the public’s sentiments, appraisals, opinions, evaluations, emotions, and attitudes towards a particular topic such services, products, issues, organizations, events, individuals, topics, and their attributes. 
There are also used many names for sentiment analysis and perform a tasks little different, e.g. sentiment analysis, sentiment mining, opinion mining, opinion extraction, emotion analysis, subjectivity analysis, review mining, affect analysis, etc. 
However, the above mention all name comes under the umbrella of opinion mining or sentiment analysis.
The main role of opinion mining or sentiment analysis is to report this problem with new methods of classification. 
The goal of sentiment analysis could be a simple sentiment polarity classification into positive or negative opinions. 
The word sentiment analysis is more frequently used in business, manufacturing etc, but both the sentiment analysis and opinion mining are usually used in academia. 
Basically both the sentiment analysis and opinion mining represent the same field of study but do a little different task. 
Initially the word sentiment analysis was used by (Nasukawa and Yi., 2003), and the word opinion-mining was first used by (Dave et al., 2003).
Sentiment analysis is very important to carefully categorize the user opinion/sentiment and decide the following three things;
Subjectivity: First the reviews/comments are evaluated to decide whether it is subjective in nature, subjective means that the analyzed comments/reviews hold any opinionated contents.
Polarity: Sentiment polarity also called sentiment-orientation. 
Polarity is categorized into two categories, i.e. positive opinion or negative opinion. 
Polarity of the comments deciding whether a given subjective comments delivered a positive or negative opinion.
Polarity Strength: The polarity of the comments can be distributed into different levels for example, very-high polarity, high polarity, low polarity, very-low polarity and so on. 
Strength of Polarity can be presented as strongly positive, mildly positive, weekly positive, weekly negative, mildly negative, strongly negative.
The environment of opinion mining comprises of four stock holders, shown in the model of opinion mining in Figure 1.2 (khan et al., 2018).
Object: Object is an entity about which the user expressed his sentiment or opinions based on their experience or knowledge. 
An entity can be a product, topic, person, thing, place and organization etc.
Opinion Holder: opinion holder is a user using internet and express views or sentiment about an object. 
For example, a user is a person representing an organization or customer in case of a product vendee
Opinion: Opinion is a piece of text which represents view or sentiment of opinion-holder about a specific object.
Peer: Peer is an organization, consumers or user could be benefited from peers (opinion-holders) rating deduced from their opinions.
Sentiment analysis is a developing and ever dynamic field, such dynamism leads to too many challenges. 
For example, which section cover the opinion of text, determine the strength of polarity, the opinion polarity, detection of spam, fake opinion identification, sentiment behind the opinion, the credibility or authenticity of the opinion identification of unrelated opinion, unclear information, identifications of biased opinion, etc. for further research and enhancement the above mention are all open issues. 
Usually, opinions are written informally and highly dissimilar to each other, this dissimilarity lead to a number of challenges. 
The following section discussed and pointed out the challenges in sentiment analysis.
Opinion in Different Languages: Different opinions users express in different languages based on the context. 
Different users write comments in their own languages even on English forums. 
For example, some users write a comment in Roman Pashto language like “Da Mobile der khaista da”, and similarly some users give the sentiment in Urdu language like “ye Mobile bohat khobsurat hy” and so on. 
For effective sentiment analysis such a consequence makes it hard to apply the technique of sentiment analysis (Rashid et al., 2013).
Opinion about a Product: Different user post their Product Reviews, comments and feedback, in different languages like “Arabic, English, Pashto, and, Urdu etc.” according to the language of the customer. 
Therefore it is a challenging task for each and every language to hold the sentiment orientation and discover the sentiment polarity of the product (Potdar et al., 2015).
Different Style Writing (Different ways of Expressing Opinions): Reviews can be written in different ways. 
Writing style of comments varies individual to individual, a sentiment may hold both aspects positive and negative. 
Hence, it is challenging to parse to analyze an opinion at the sentence level, which covers both positive and negative sentiment (Rashid et al., 2013).
Crossed Lingual Opinion: The user uses several languages when users are communicating with a specific community, and post their opinion in several languages about a service or product which is very difficult to analyze. 
For example, “Da Mobile der khaista da, its slim” is an opinion in Pashto and English.
Contextual Information (Use of Metaphor or Simile): User opinion needs contextual information to understand by the reader and understands it in its true sense. 
This usually happens with social media websites, especially in the Facebook, twitter which needs high level contextual information and tough to obtain it automatically
It is a challenging task to group synonym words and identifying and interpreting it in the same sense 
(Vinodhini et al., 2012).
Words Orientation Problem: identification of the words orientation in an opinion is very difficult and might be different according to the situation.
Because of the difficulty of the problem i.e. expressions in text, underlying concepts, etc., many distinct tasks are includes by Sentiment Analysis. 
These tasks are generally collected to give some information about the opinions originate in sentence or documents level of sentiment analysis. 
A summary of these tasks are explain in the following section.
The first goal is to detect sentiment or opinion in a text, which may be observed as arrangement of text as subjective or objective. 
Generally opinion detection in a text is based on the inspection of adjectives in sentences. 
The second goal of sentiment analysis is that to classify the sentiment polarity. 
The aim is to given an opinionated part of text are categorize into opinion as falling under one of two opposite sentiment polarities, or find its position of the opinion range between these two polarities positive and negative polarity.
The above two mention tasks can be complete at different stages like, sentence-level sentiment analysis, phrase level, or document level sentiment analysis.
Sentiment polarity also called sentiment-orientation. 
Polarity can be positive, negative or neutral. Neutral generally means no sentiment or the absence of sentiment. 
Determine the orientation or polarity of the text, as in deciding whether a given subjective text expresses a positive or negative opinion.
Additionally, a polarity difference must be made between the sentiment polarity and its strength. 
Three different levels can be implemented on Sentiment analysis (SA), dependent on the nature of the data and choice of the users. The following are the three levels of analysis:
Document level sentiment analysis
Sentence level sentiment analysis
Aspect level sentiment analysis 
To categorize the sentiments of whole document Document-level sentiment analysis is used, and complete document opinion are expresses by document level sentiment analysis, positive or negative. 
Holds a single result for each document i.e. positive  opinion or negative opinion. 
For example, when we give a review of product to the system, the system will decide whether the product review expresses an overall opinion of the document is a positive or negative opinion. Document-level of sentiment analysis expresses the opinion on a single entity of each document. Thus, the document-level of analysis is not relevant to documents which compare or evaluate several entities. 
In this level of analysis, every single sentence is considered as a single unit and each sentence of the document should contain only one opinion (Positive opinion, Negative opinion or Neutral opinion). 
Neutral opinion means absence of opinion. Sentence level sentiment analysis is closely connected to classification of subjectivity. 
This is used to detect whether the given sentence is objective or subjective and if the sentence is determined subjective then the subjective sentence orientation is calculated as positive or negative. Following are the two tasks of Sentence level sentiment analysis:
Subjectivity Classification 
Classification  of Sentiment 
A sentence (comments or reviews) can be classifies either objective sentence or subjective sentence. 
The subjective sentence has sentiment or opinions but Objective sentence comprises the facts. It has no opinion or sentiment about the object or entity (Kolkur et al., 2015).
Subjective Sentiment can be categorized into positive sentiment, negative sentiment or neutral. Neutral means a sentence or documents that have no opinion. 
Sentence can be classified as positive, negative or neutral based on the sentiment words present in sentence (Kolkur et al., 2015).
The aims of this level of sentiment classification are to identifying and extracting the sentiment polarity of a particular feature or aspect of the product from the source data. 
The entity and aspect level of classification generate feature based sentiment classification of different product reviews. 
The opinion of each product’s feature or attribute is classifying as positive or negative.
The main difference is that the aspect-level sentiment analyses analyze and extract different attribute, aspect or feature, instead of concentrating on language units, for example, sentences, paragraphs or documents. 
The aspect level sentiment analysis aim is to recognize each aspect of the attribute mention in a comment.  i.e. mobile phone have various features like apps, touch screen, price, battery-life, camera etc. 
Aspect-level of sentiment analysis Commonly used in the real-time sentiment analysis systems. Both the sentence-level and document-level analyses do not determine the feature of entity what exactly people liked and did not like. 
Aspect level sentiment classification is more finer-grained analysis. 
Feature-level sentiment analysis Aspect was called before aspect level sentiment analysis (Liu, 2012).
The following are the basic steps for aspect-based sentiment analysis (Tribhuvan et al, 2014).
Organizing Review Database 
Part of Speech (POS) Tagging 
Feature Extraction 
Extraction of Opinion Word 
Polarity Identification of Opinion Word 
Polarity Identification Opinion Sentence 
Summary Generation  
The sentiment classification techniques can be broadly divided into two main groups. 
Machine-learning approach and lexicon-based approach.  
The machine learning method commonly uses in the sentiment analysis. 
The Machine-learning approach can be divided further into three methods, supervised method, unsupervised method and semi-supervised methods. 
The supervised method of sentiment analysis involves training a classifier on a large number of labeled datasets. 
Key features as the labeled training documents have topic related words. 
The opinions express a negative opinion or a positive opinion. Sub classifications of the Supervised Learning method are briefly explains in the following section. 
Probabilistic Classifier, Decision Tree, Linear classifier, Rule-Based and.
Decision tree builds regression models or classification in the form of a tree structure. Decision-Trees are used for prediction; for classification they can be used easily. 
Unknown class label given as a record and decision-tree is tested against this record, and the path of the node is drawn from the basis node to that node who decides the prediction of class for the record. 
These are common because the building of decision-tree does not need settings or any domain expertise.
The main algorithm for building decision-trees called ID3, to build a decision-tree ID3 uses Information Gain (IG) and Entropy, ID3 and C5 are commonly used algorithms for implementations of decision tree in the problems of text classification (Vryniotis et al., 2013).
Linear-classifiers model is known because of their easiness. 
To determine the sentence’s polarity linear-classifiers used to calculate the amount of positive and negative opinion words in comments and match the amount of positive and negative words with sentence. 
And add weight to all of the word; the highest weight of the words is “most-positive” and the lowest weight of the words is “most-negative”. 
Support Vector Machines (SVM) Classifiers is the most usually used linear-classifier (Medhat et al., 2014).
The Rule Based Classifier and decision-tree classifier are same because in both classifiers Rule-based and decision tree classifier rules on the feature space are encoded. 
The main difference between both classifiers is that the, the hierarchical approach using by decision-tree classifier while rule based classifier allows for overlap in the decision space (Liu et al., 2012). 
decision tree classifier are converted to a rule based classifier in different ways. 
In the rule-based classifier, uses the training phases to create the rules-based on different conditions, support and confidence is the two most popular rule based method (Pietquin et al., 2004).
Whereas the unsupervised method trying to find the hidden structure of the un-labeled data. Unsupervised machine-learning methods are used when it is tough to find these labeled training documents. 
When creating the class-labeled training documents is too difficult the Un-supervised Learning Method is used mainly. 
Unsupervised method is broadly used for analysis of clustering document because the document clustering does not depend on training documents which are predefined class labeled.
Semi-supervised learning makes use of un-labeled data for training, usually a small amount of labeled data with a huge amount of un-labeled data (Dorothy and Rajini., 2013).
This method depends on opinion-lexicon. 
Lexicon is a group of known and pre-compiled opinions words. 
Lexicon based method is another un-supervised method, but in lexicon based method it utilize a synonyms and antonyms dictionary of opinionated words and phrases with their corresponding sentiment orientation. 
Additionally, lexicon-based method is further divide into dictionary based method and corpus based method which using a semantic method or statistical method to find out the sentiment polarity of the input text.
The main strategy of Dictionary Based method is to gather a minor set of sentiment words manually and then mature this set of opinion by searching in collection of huge texts such as WordNet dictionary.  
Added the new words to the already existed set of sentiment words till there are no more remaining words to be originate and the cycle are repeated. 
The major weakness of dictionary based method is that this method entirely depends on corpora and the domain will not have a huge collection of opinion words every time. 
It is essential to mention that the entire lexicon words cannot express a positive or negative sentiment about an entity 
(Liu et al., 2012).
Hybrid approach of sentiment analysis is the combination of machine learning method and lexicon based method to address Sentiment Analysis. 
However the hybrid-methods of sentiment analysis is not regularly used as compare to the approaches mentioned above the Hybrid approach produces more favorable results.
Few researchers have worked on hybrid techniques and specified that the combination 
of both the lexicon-based approaches and machine learning approach increase the 
performance of sentiment classification technique. (Mudinas et al., 2012) 
Worked on concept level sentiment analysis system, pSenti, hybridize the two approaches 
learning-based and lexicon-based approaches. 
The main advantage of their hybrid approach using learning-based and lexicon-based approaches is to achieve the best of both worlds stability along with readability from a carefully designed lexicon, and to achieve the high accuracy from a powerful supervised machine learning algorithm. 
Different techniques of sentiment analysis are shown in Figure 3.1.
In recent years, social media sites such as Facebook or Twitter successfully succeed in engaging a huge numbers of online users where they not only become content readers but they also generate and publish content. 
Users of social media create a huge volume of reviews and comments daily related to different sides of life such as, scientific, political and social subjects in order to eradicate the issues and devise improvements.  
Analyzing data from social media can help to determining public view. 
Many politicians are also aiming to connect to people through social media like Facebook, twitter etc. 
People post their support or disagreement towards government policies, elections, actions and debates, etc.
it is very difficult to evaluate reviews manually for a particular thing because of the rapid growth of data. 
Therefore to deal with this problem an attempt is made to propose a model for analyzing the opinion of people on political reviews. 
Sentiment analyzer developed for other well studied international languages, like English etc.,
Pashto language script is based on Arabic language alphabet and written from right side to left in diagonal line and is cursive in nature. 
Sentiment analysis is very essential for Pashto script because Pashto language websites are becoming more popular and the people always prefer to share their opinions in a native language. Sentiment analyzer developed for other well studied international languages, like English etc., but those solutions are not workable for the Pashto language, because of their script, grammatical, and morphological differences. 
As a result, the Pashto language should be considered as an independent problem domain. Analyzing polarity of Pashto comments is a research issue. 
This work is going to analyze the Pashto comments and identify the polarity of those comments.
To identify the polarity of comments written in Pashto language script and to categorize into positive or negative opinion.
To build a Lexicon for Pashto language and to measure the efficiency of the proposed scheme using Precision, Recall and F-Measure
Climate change is the wonder from the previous couple of hundred years of rising in normal surface air temperatures of Earth. 
This idea of a global temperature alteration is identified with the phenomenon of climate change (Michael, 2004). 
The expansion in worldwide mean temperatures coming about because of environmental variation has wide achieving ramifications for the world's environments and other frameworks (Lee and Brenner, 2015). 
The exponential increment in the temperature of the earth and the worldwide ocean level over the most recent couple of years is a noteworthy part of environmental variation which has pulled in specialists and a policymaker lately (Aizebeokhai, 2009). 
Global temperature boost is never again only an expectation, it is occurring. It is undisputed that the mean temperature at the surface of the globe has expanded over the previous century by about 0.6°C (James and Bill, 2005).
Effects incorporate heat related bleakness and mortality, increments in vector-borne ailments (for example dengue fever, intestinal sickness), expanded respiratory ailment, and bleakness and mortality because of outrageous climate events (Katie et al., 2018). 
The study led to environmental change by the United Nations Framework Convention in 2007 shows that the expansion in the heat is a direct result of the greenhouse impact, bringing the environmental change. 
The major attributes of an environmental shift are rises in mean global temperature. 
Almost 7% of the worldwide populace has encountered at least 20% reduction in renewable water assets in most recent couple of years (M. Salem et al., 2018).
The world's atmosphere makes natural greenhouse impact which keeps the world's surface hotter than it would have been something else.
Life is a basic piece of the earth framework and every single living thing impacts the synthesis of greenhouse gases in the climate by "breathing in" and "breathing out" oxygen and carbon dioxide, in this way keeping up a synthetic parity in the environment. 
Scope of human activities, which incorporate significantly the consumption of petroleum derivatives, mechanical exercises, and the chopping down of woods for agrarian purposes and urbanization, are generously expanding the convergences of greenhouse gases in the climate, consequently disquieting the environmental chemical equalization (Aizebeokhai, 2009).
Fossil derivatives are being endlessly used to generate power. 
The consumption of these powers produces gases like carbon dioxide and nitrous oxides which lead to climate change. 
Deforestation is additionally prompting expanding temperatures. 
The danger of a dangerous climate change is constantly making real harm to the Earth's atmosphere (Shahzad, 2015).
As indicated by United Nations Framework Convention in 2007 climate change will have wide-running consequences for the earth and on the social and economic factors and associated sectors, such as water assets, nutrition security and agribusiness, sea zones, earthbound ecosystems, biodiversity, and human health. 
the rainfall pattern changes are probably going to prompt serious additionally flooding and water deficiencies. 
Liquefying of icy masses can cause soil disintegration and flooding. 
Rise in the temperatures can cause moves in changes in the dispersion of sickness vectors knocking more individuals in danger from illnesses, for example, dengue fever and malaria, and crop developing periods that influence nourishment safety. 
Temperature increments can conceivably seriously increment rates of elimination for some species and habitats (up to 30 percent with a 2° C ascend in temperature). 
As indicated by the accessible data, an unnatural climate change has expanded the strength of rainfall occasions over ongoing years. 
In December 1999, for example, Venezuela witness its monthly rainfall most elevated over 100 years, including monstrous flooding and landslides which killed roughly 30000 individuals. 
In 2 days in Maiquetia city, the rain fell with a force usually experienced only once in a thousand years (James and Bill, 2005). 
As indicated by the World Health Organization in 2003 rainfall occasions would in general strengthen with progressively frequent extraordinary occasions improving the probability of flooding and dry spells. 
The territorial climate system, with the extraordinary monsoon of south and west Asia, could experience latitudinal move. 
As indicated by the Asian Development Bank in 2017 environmental change can influence both natural and social determinants of wellbeing, hygienic air, clean drinking water, and satisfactory food. 
This will happen by outrageous warmth occasions, inconstant rainfall patterns, disaster events, and. 
Heatwave occasions are anticipated to increment the recurrence and term.
Global temperature boost mostly results from the expanded levels of ozone depleting substances prompted by anthropogenic exercises (Audrey and Sylvie, 2020).
To comprehend climate change, it is first essential to gotten familiar with the greenhouse effect. As Figure 1.1 shows, the natural greenhouse impact generally traps nearly a bit of heat so that this planet is a shield from attaining freezing temperatures whereas heightened greenhouse effect increases the dangerous atmospheric devotion. 
This is because of the intense use of petroleum derivatives that rises the number of greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane, and oxides of nitrogen) existing in the climate. 
The exchange of incoming and outgoing radiation that warms up the Earth is often alluded to as the greenhouse impact because that a greenhouse works along these lines as appeared in Figure 1.2 (I. Thacker and Gale, 2019).
The heatwave is a time of too much sweltering climate, which might be joined by high humidity. Heatwaves are alluded to as the exceptional time of humid and warm or potentially dry and warm conditions, which reign through three to five continuous days through a late spring season (Hanif, 2017). 
Government agencies and the American Red Cross by and large characterize heat waves as broadened timeframes, commonly forty-eight to seventy-two hours and more, with over the top warmth and humidity. 
A heat index (HI) is utilized to decide over the top heat, considering both temperature and humidity (Carlson, 2008). 
A heatwave is characterized as the number of days when, for some back to back days, the temperature is more prominent than a specific edge, keeping in view the climatology of the station. In this report, the quantity of days has been considered heatwave days when, for no less than 6 back to back days, the Tmax ≥ 90th percent of the temperature records in a year (Qamar et al., 2009).
The heat index is the extent of the stress set on individuals by raised degrees of air temperature and humidity. 
the ability of the human body to release heat through evaporating is blocked thereby causing uneasiness and stress as the air moistness content raises (Delworth et al., 1999).
The heat index is a good coherent thought used to quantify the impact of heatwave miracle to a person in a particular region by uniting the general impacts of wind speed, humidity, temperature, and vaporous pressure (Qamar et al., 2009).
This research is carried out with the following principles and processes discussed below:
Data mining is a method toward discovering patterns in a large dataset with approaches at the intersection of statistics, database frameworks, and machine learning. 
data mining is the computer science and statistics sub-field with the all-purpose aim to gather data (by intelligent strategies) from a dataset and modify the information into a conceivable form for supplementary use.
Supervised learning is just a formalization of gaining from models. 
In supervised learning, the learner (usually, a PC program) is furnished with two arrangements of data, a training set, and a test set. 
The learner to "learn" from a lot of labeled models in the training set, so it can recognize unlabeled precedents in the test set with the most noteworthy conceivable accuracy. 
That is, the objective of the learner is to build up a standard, a program, or a methodology that orders new precedents (in the test set) by breaking down models it has been given that as of now have a class label (Erik, 2014).
Linear regression is a lot of factual procedures for evaluating the relationships between factors. Linear regression includes many ways for displaying and analyzing some factors, the concentration is connecting a dependent variable and at least one independent variable (or 'predictors'). 
Even more explicitly, Linear regression study services and sees how the common estimation of the dependent variable varies when any of the independent variables has fluctuated, whereas other independent variables are held static frequently give a reasonable and interpretable depiction of how the information sources influence the output. 
Where Y is a vector of observed esteems called the regressand or dependent variable. 
This variable is likewise here and there known as the anticipated variable and X might be viewed as a matrix of row-vectors which are known as regressors or independent variables (Li and Baron, 2012).
Linear regression has many sensible services. Many applications are categorized into two general modules: 
If the goal is a prediction or estimating, or error decreasing, linear regression possibly be utilized as a predictive model to an observed data index of estimations of the response and illustrative factors. 
Once developed such a model, if additional estimations of the illustrative factors are gathered without going with response esteem, the developed model is applied to guess the response. 
If the objective is to clarify variety in the response variable that is ascribed to variations in the illustrative factors, the analysis may be associated to measure the excellence of the connection between the response and explanatory, and specifically to decide if some illustrative factors can have not any linear connection with the response in any way or to differentiate which sub-sets of explanatory factors may have repetitive data of the response. 
A simple linear regression prototype is just a single informative variable. 
which worries with 2-dimensional example values having a single independent and dependent variable (conservatively, x and y coordinates in Cartesian co-ordinate structure) it finds a linear function, as precisely as could reasonably be expected, forecasts the dependent variable attribute as an element of an independent variable. 
In machine learning, support vector machines (SVMs, additionally support-vector networks) are supervised learning prototype having associated learning algorithms which investigate data used for classification and regression examination. 
Assumed a dataset of training examples, every set separately has a place with either of two categories, SVM training algorithm makes a prototype that allocates new directors to a category or other, which makes it a non-probabilistic binary linear classifier. 
SVM prototype is a representation of the models as points in space, plotted so instances of diverse classes are parted by a clear gap that is as wide as could reasonably be probable. 
New prototypes are then plotted into that identical space and anticipated to have a classification with a class reliant on which side of the opening they fall.
A multilayer perceptron (MLP) is a category of feedforward artificial neural network. 
A multilayer perceptron minimum of no less than three coats of nodes: an input layer, output layer, and hidden layer. 
With out of the input nodes, every node is a neuron that operates a non-linear initiation function. MLP uses a supervised learning technique called back-propagation for training. 
It has multiple layers and nonlinear actuation discriminate multilayer perceptron from a linear perceptron. 
It distinguishes data that isn't linearly distinguishable.
Linear correlation is a proportion of how much two factors differ together or a proportion of the intensity of the relationship between two factors. 
A straight-line connection between two factors. 
These are seven major applications of data mining techniques which are discussed below:
Future Healthcare Data mining grips extraordinary probable to advance health outlines. 
It uses data and examination to distinguish best practices that advance care and reduce costs. scholars use data mining techniques like multidimensional databases, machine learning, soft processing, data representation, and statistics. 
Data mining may be used to foresee the capacity of patients in each class. 
Processes are built up that make sure that the patients get suitable care at the right spot and on time. 
Data mining may also help medicinal detect to identify abuse and scam
Market basket analysis a demonstrating strategy reliant on a theory that you buy an explicit gathering of items you may probably buy another gathering of things. 
That method can allow the seller to recognize the buyer’s behavior of buying. 
That information may assist the seller in knowing the buyer’s needs and modify the shop format accordingly. 
Applying differential correlation examination of outcomes among many stores, among clients in different statistic get-togethers should be possible. 
Financial Banking with automated banking wherever an enormous amount of information to be created having new transactions. 
Data mining can add to putting everything in order issues in banking and cash by finding examples, relationships, and associations in business information and marketplace prices that are not expeditiously clear to overseers in light of the way that the volume data is unnecessarily huge or is created too quickly to screen by experts. 
The chiefs may find this information for better separating, concentrating on, picking up, keeping, and holding a gainful customer.
Corporate surveillance is an inspection of an individual or social occasion's conduct by a venture. 
The information accumulated is much of the time used for promoting purposes or offered to various organizations and yet is reliably bestowed to government workplaces. 
It will in general be used by the commercial to modify their things attractive by their customers. 
The data may be used for direct advancing drives, for instance, the concentrated-on promotions on Google and Yahoo, where commercials are engaged to the customer of the web searcher by separating their history and messages.
Research Analysis history demonstrates that we have seen progressive variations in the study. Data mining is useful in information cleansing, data preprocessing, and mixed databases. 
The analysts may locate any comparative information from the database that may get slightly modification in the exploration. 
Distinguishing proof of any co-happening successions and the relationship among exercises can be known. 
Data representation and visual data mining furnish us with an unmistakable perspective on the information.
Criminal Investigation is a method that hopes to recognize wrongdoing traits. crime examination includes discovering and perceiving infringement and their relationship with offenders. 
The high volume of wrongdoing datasets and besides the multifaceted idea of associations among these kinds of data have completed criminology a legitimate field for applying data mining techniques. 
Substance based crime reports may be transformed over into word processing records. This information may be utilized to achieve a crime coordinating system.
Bio Informatics Data Mining methods appear to be in a perfect world appropriate for Bioinformatics, meanwhile, that is data rich. 
The data mining of biological information separates valuable learning from monstrous datasets collected in natural science, and other related life sciences areas, for instance, neuroscience and drug. 
Employments of data mining to bioinformatics consolidate DNA portion finding, protein work suggestion, illness analysis, disease behavior optimization, protein, and DNA segment connection organize recreation, data purifying, and protein sub cell area prediction.
Remote sensing is done from planes or satellites as Landsat or on the ground. 
To rehash the substance of the definition above, remote sensing utilizes tools that house sensors to see the ghastly, spatial, and radiometric relations of perceptible items and materials at a distance. 
Most sensing modes depend on examining photons relating to recurrence in the electromagnetic (EM) range. 
In a lot of remote sensing, the system incorporates a correspondence among occurrence radioactivity and the goals of intrigue. 
This is exhibited using imaging structures where seven segments are incorporated. 
Note, remote sensing in like manner incorporates the sensing of discharged energy and the usage of non-emitted sensors.
Energy Source or Illumination (A) - The vital essential of remote sensing is having an imperativeness source that lights up or provides electromagnetic vitality to the target of intrigue.
Radiation and the Atmosphere (B) - The light makes an outing from the source towards a target, this may associate with and communicate to the atmosphere it experiences. 
That affiliation can happen a 2nd time as the imperativeness ventures out from its target towards the sensor.
Interaction with the Target (C) - when the light advances toward an objective by the atmosphere, that connects with objective depend on the possessions of the objective and the radiation.
Recording of Energy by the Sensor (D) - when the light is dispersed by, or emitted from objective, then we need device/sensors (remote - not in contact with the objective) for assembling and recording the electromagnetic radiation.
Transmission, Reception, and Processing (E) - The light collected through sensors should be conveyed frequently to an electrical structure to the getting and managing station somewhere the information is prepared.
Interpretation and Analysis (F) - The handled picture is interpreted, digitally, or visually and electrically to remove data about the objective that was illumined. 
Application (G) - The final part of the remote sensing procedure is cultivated when we put on the information, we have had the size to extricate from the imagery about the objective to more understand it, reveal a few new information’s, or assistance with the solution of an explicit issue.
Image processing is a field of remote sensing which has pulled in great consideration with the refining utilization of unmanned flying planes. 
That method is essential for showing aerial remote sensing focal points. 
Examining the surface through space-conceived sensors and conveying back the pictures with progressively more phantom, three-dimensional and fleeting quality, carrying remarkable advantages without breaking a sweat of access and accessibility for resident use (Reindfuss et al., 1998).
The image processing is a method used for controlling digital pictures through utilizing PC. This is usually used for decreasing haze, noise, symmetrical improvement, and for figuring out band proportion, (Seetha et al., 2008). 
Once this is being done as such the satellite image characterization is to be done and the LU/LC plotting are formed from the exact classification. 
Image processing is an adult investigation region that permits the real, genuine applications having a pure advantage for this world. 
The image processing basic principle objectives are displaying and watching the procedures on Earth's and also their correspondence with the environment; evaluating and figuring organic, geological, physical factors; and ordering resources on the surface spread and examine the unearthly marks detected via aerial sensors or from the satellite. 
For accomplishing these goals, it is conceivable because assets in an act reflect, draw in, discharge, and alternately retain electro-magnetic beams relying upon their shape and atomic organization (Tuia et al., 2009).
Image classification is a standout amongst the main fundamental part in the field of remote sensing utilized to gather the consistent and profitable data of the scene (Dai et al., 2010). 
By and large, the general goal of the remote sensing process is to characterize every one of the pixels in a picture into land spread classes consequently. 
This is perhaps attainable by PC supported investigation. An expansive amount of classiﬁcation strategies are available those are typically called unsupervised and supervised classiﬁcation. The strategy utilized to remove digital data in which the pixels are relegated by the PC to assemble with no data from the administrator, the supervised procedure depends on the likeness of pre-deﬁned classes that have been portrayed frightfully (Prabhakar et al., 2015).
Image classification is utilized and useful in image classification, medication, armed forces, and numerous different fields. 
In remote sensing, the utilization of basic classifiers is to spot all the scene class’s in a picture. For classification in image classification, countless classifiers are utilized. 
Those classifiers are utilized to upgrade the classification of pictures in Image classification (Goel et al., 2015). 
In some parts of the eco-friendly application, the assignment of remote sensing is significant. Image classification has a place with an active arena in registering study, for pattern recognition. 
Because of multivariable factual goods, the picture pixels may also be classified, for example, pixel clustering characterization, or through partitions dependent on insights communication and spatial with closest pixels (Bai et al., 2009).
Current techniques for the classification of the earth are called classiﬁers, those classifiers were created from many ways to deal with distinguishing models and acknowledgment which are currently kept running as PC programs (Steiner et al., 1970).
For computerized land-cover classiﬁcation principle reason for existing links the picture spectral attributes into an important data class, that may be put on view as a guide, so that researcher may survey the scene in the exact and financially savvy way (Weber et al., 2001).
Utilizing that method, the investigator has sufficiently accessible realized pixels for creating illustrative parameters for each class of premium. 
This progression is known as training. 
When trained the classifier is then utilized to connect labels to all the picture pixels as per the trained parameters (Liu, 2005).
Supervised classification is an essential device utilized for gathering significant quantitative data from remotely detected pictures information (Richards et al., 1999). 
The procedure utilized to remove computerized data in which the administrator appoints preparing site data that the PC utilized to allot pixels to the classes (Lwin, 2008).
Typically, the arrangement comprises of four sections, the initial segment or part is preprocessing that is utilized to lessen noise and so on. 
The 2nd part of the classification is training sample: this progression the framework is trained on the base choice of specific fundamentals for portraying the pattern, the third step is to pick out by choosing a fitting method for assessing the image pattern in like manner with the target and the final part is to check the precision of classification (Seetha et al., 2008).
From a practical point of view, depicting the scene in the true color of a high-resolution satellite image could be the most pleasant one for visualization and normal interpretation (Chen and Tsai, 1998). 
Most satellites cover just two visual spectral bands i.e. red and green also one in the near-infrared region. As a result, as a blue band is necessary for the red, green, and blue combination true color cannot be formed (Patra et al., 2005). 
Three primary colors (red, green, and blue) are used in displaying a color composite image. They produce different colors in the visible spectrum when these three colors are combined in various proportions. 
Connecting each spectral band (not an obvious band) to a different essential color brings about a color composite image.
Form red, green and blue, if optical images lacking any of these three visual essential color bands, some of the spectral groups may not be in the obvious region, red, green and blue must be joined so that the presence of the showed image takes after an unmistakable color photo, for example, water in blue, soil in dark-colored or dim, vegetation in green, and so on.
The display color task for any band of a multispectral image should be possible in a completely subjective way. 
For this situation, the color of an objective in the displayed image doesn't have any likeness to its real color. 
The subsequent item is known as a false-color composite image. 
There are numerous potential plans for delivering a false-color composite image. Notwithstanding, some plans might be increasingly reasonable for recognizing certain items in the image.
If a multispectral image comprises of the three-visual essential color bands (red, green, blue), the three bands might be joined to deliver a "true color” image. For instance, the bands 3 (red band), 2 (green band), and 1 (blue band) multispectral image can be relegated separately to the R, G, and B colors for show. 
Along these lines, the colors of the subsequent colors composite image look like intently what might be seen by the human eyes. 
Climate change is increasing the intensity, duration, and frequency of hot weather in South Asia. 
The heat index is a serious threat to human health. 
Pakistan faced heatwave for the first time on 26 May 2010 when 53.5oC the highest temperature ever in Pakistan was recorded in Moenjo Daro, Sindh. 
The occurrence of heatwaves has increased in Pakistan in June 2015 Karachi City experienced a severe heatwave that caused over 1,200 deaths and over 50,000 cases of heat illness. 
This research is to identify the factors that are increasing heat index and to assess the competent data mining and remote sensing techniques according to the requirement and specification.
The human activities like industrialization, pollution, emission of gases in the atmosphere, and the uncontrolled population have increased the world’s temperature, which ultimately leads us to the extreme weather. 
Climate change is an alarming threat to human health and the earth’s ecosystem, it has also affected the seasons of the world. 
The summer seasons have prolonged while the winters have become short all-across the globe. The summer season is becoming hotter and it is upsetting the lives of the general population occupied with outside exercises during red-hot hours. 
In the last few decades, the rise in the heat index and variation in the rainfall has been observed all around the world including Pakistan. 
Since 1970, anomalies have been witnessed in the maximum-minimum temperature and rainfall in Pakistan. 
According to the study conducted in 2015, an average of 1ºC rise in the heat index in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa a province of Pakistan has been recorded in the past decades. 
Peshawar a capital of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa has also witnessed a noticeable rise in the heat index, which ultimately affects the lives of the citizens. 
Identifying factors that contributed to a substantial increase in the heat index in the Peshawar region is a research issue. 
This work aims to dig out the features and causes that increased the heat index in the Peshawar region.
To detect variations in Temperature, Rainfall, and Relative-Humidity, which are increasing or decreasing Heat Index from 1985 to 2017 in weather data using data mining techniques.
To identify changes in greenery and barren land in past decades utilizing satellite images from geographic information systems (GIS).
To inspect an increase in the number of Vehicles from the past couple of decades in Peshawar district and inspect the variation in the Air-quality data and to find its impact on Heat Index.
The key scope of this study is to find out the reasons causing Heat Index variation in Peshawar district by utilizing data mining, neural networks techniques such as; Linear Regression, Simple-Linear Regression, Support-Vector Machines Regression, Multilayer Perceptron, and Linear Correlation, and using remotely sensed imagery i.e. Landsat 5 & 8 images using WEKA, Neural Designer, ArcMap, and ENVI.
The significance is that as the HI increase will be known so how much to worry about heat waves and is the current increase in HI can cause heat illness, whereas the factors of the increase in HI, increase in vehicles and air quality conditions are identified so it will make it easy to take necessary steps to tackle it before further heatwaves knock the region. 
Furthermore, as the amount of greenery and barren land is classified so it will help to estimate how many plantations can help to counterbalance HI, air quality, and vehicular emission.
This thesis is organized as:
The chapter 2 consists of the literature reviewed, followed by the chapter 3 where the proposed research methodology for this research is discussed in detail, then chapter 4 consists of the results and discussion of the overall research work and chapter 5 consists of the summary, conclusion, and recommendation.
After the advent of information technology, the cost of processing power and storage became easier and cheaper. 
This led to the production of huge amount of data stored in numerous formats like text documents, files, videos, images, audios and many other formats. 
Likewise, the amount of data stored in the databases is also increasing rapidly. 
These databases contain valuable information regarding predictions and improvement of organizations performance. 
These databases require proper techniques to extract hidden knowledge for sound decision-making. 
The data mining also referred to as Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD), discovers useful information from large databases. 
The data mining techniques applied in various fields like social media, education, medicine, marketing and engineering etc. 
Social media is an emerging discipline of data mining that is applied on social network data. 
The social media mining encompasses various data mining techniques that take social networks data into consideration and subsequently apply these techniques to improve the future prediction. 
The present research designed to predict global warming by using classification techniques i.e. Naïve Bayesian algorithm and Support Vector Machine algorithm.
The applications of the opinion mining and sentiment analysis are enormous and is very fast emergent fields now days. 
In past peoples will collect opinions form theirs relatives and friends formerly purchasing an item, but in present modern world, the trend is changed and now the inclination is to recognize the opinions of a variability of individuals around the sphere by using microblogging data. 
This research work conversed an approach where a revealed stream of tweets form the microblogging sites like twitter are classified and preprocessed built on their expressive content such as positive, negative and irreverent.  
For this purpose, many classification algorithms are used for this tenacity in order to find the values of the precision and recall (Balakrishnan et al., 2012). 
(Alec et al., (2009) has stated the different types of data mining techniques in the field of Opinion Mining as Classification, Prediction, association rule mining and clustering. The present research will predict the Climate change (Global Warming) by using Naïve Bayesian and Support Vector Machine algorithms. 
The present research will not only predict climate change but will also compare the performance of these algorithms to find out the best algorithm for the given set of data.
On social media, sites huge amount of user spawned contents are created every day.  With the passage of time and in future this tendency will be increased more in the future. 
Hence, it is very perilous for consumers, producers and service providers to figure out effectiveness and management of gigantic user generated data classic data mining. 
On social media, sites large amount of contents are user generated and this data, which obtained from these sites are frequently in the form of distributed, unstructured, noisy and dynamic. 
Due to these features of data pretense new challenges to data mining tasks to devise new efficient algorithms and techniques. 
For instance, twitter and Facebook report data of web traffic form around 149 million and 90 million unique U.S visitors per month correspondingly. 
More than 4 billion videos watched per day, and 6 hours of videos uploaded every minute bestowing to video sharing site YouTube.
According to Flicker (picture sharing site) as of august 2011, multitudes more than 6 billion photo images. 
Wikipedia hosts also more than 20 million articles attracting over 365 million bibliophiles. 
Reliant on social media stands, most of the time the data, which is derived from social media, is very noisy. 
Formerly applying effective mining, it is very essential to remove noise from the data. According to researchers, it is proved that spammers produce more data than appropriate users. 
There is no specific dominant authority to maintain and filter data because most of the social media sites data are distributed and dispersed. 
It is very tedious task for researchers to comprehend the flow of information on the social media due to distributed nature of social media. 
This is because most of the social media data is unstructured (Yardi et al., 2008). 
It is very tedious task to attain unstructured data from numerous data sources and to make meaningful observations. 
For instance, various social media sites like Facebook, Flickr, twitter, and LinkedIn assist dissimilar purposes and meet different essentials of users, as social media sites are constantly evolving and dynamic in nature. 
Due to these factors, Facebook newly carried about many impressions including a user timeline, the creation of in-groups for a user and also many user privacy policy changes.  
When we study social media sites data deeply many different interesting questions to human behavior can be evaluated. 
The social media sites also find significant people to maximize the spread of the products within the specified budget. 
The sociologist also uncover the human behavior such as out-group and in-group behaviors of users. 
Now a days social media plays a vital role in facilitating mass movements such as the occupy of wall street and Arab spring (Gundecha et al., 2012).
Data mining is also identified as Knowledge Finding in Database extracts valuable, non-trivial and hidden information from large databases. 
The data mining techniques are applied on large databases to discover useful hidden patterns and relationships. 
Han and Kamber (2000), has described the data mining software that analyze the data from different perspectives, dimensions and classify it as per characteristics of attributes and summarize the relationships found in the data during the data mining process.
Data mining is very popular and interesting in the information industry due to availability of the huge amount of data and high demand to convert the information into useful Data and knowledge. 
Data mining is the integration of people, information, algorithms, business knowledge, statistics and computing technology. 
The data mining uses various techniques like classification, clustering, association rule mining to dig out useful Data (information) from the data. 
Data mining uses various algorithms and techniques for extracting knowledge from the databases. 
Classification is the most widespread and applied data mining technique which is broadly used for prediction based on the historical data or known results. 
Classification is a supervised learning technique, which examine the properties of newly presented observation and assigning it to a predefined class. 
The classification process is performed in two different phases i.e. the learning phase also called the training phase and the testing phase also called the classification phase. The training set is used to build the classification model while test set is used to validate it or to determine the accuracy of the model. 
Classification can be used in opinion mining to predict the climate change. The following two algorithms have been opted for this purpose.
For data mining and machine learning on of the most effective and efficient algorithm is Naïve Bayes. 
The performance competition of Naïve Bayes is amazing this is due to the fact that the conditional independence supposition, on which it is based is very true in real world applications.  
Due to the classification, the performance of the Naïve Bayes is very high (Zhang, 2004).
SVM (Support Vector Machine) is a data-mining algorithms; the SVM learns through examples and also assign labels to different objects.
 For example, support vector machine detect and learn deceitful credit card activity by checking large amount of data.
Alternatively, support vector machine can also applied for many applications in the field of biology.  
One of the common biomedical application of SVM is the programmed classification of micro array gene appearance of profiles (Noble and William, 2006).
An online social networking site (Twitter) where text data is generated with high speed. 
So it is hard to analyze and predict from a single tweet that what is actually happening in real world. 
Many people believe that climate change will have adverse effect on life in coming time, however there is no such mechanism that automatically identify the opinion of people forwards climate change. 
Extracting the polarity of people’s opinion about climate change is a research issue in this work. 
Therefore, it is important and necessary to classify these topics into general categories with high accuracy for better information retrieval. 
As from these topics one of the most trending and important topic is climate change. 
So the aim of this research work is to predict climate change by using classification algorithms like naïve Bayesian and support vector machine with high precision and accuracy.
The objectives of this research work are as under.
To predict the change in opinion by using classification techniques (i.e. Naïve Bayesian and Support Vector Machine).
To compare the performance of Naïve Bayesian and Support Vector Machine algorithms to identify the best classifier for predicting with change in opinion attributes in the available data.
The world is covered by ¾ part of water (karim et.al 2018). 
Due to the developing applications for underwater environment it is getting more attention of researchers. 
These applications includes underwater poisonous waste monitoring, disaster monitoring, navigation control, water transportation etc.
 In Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) the radio waves are used for the communication from one node to another in a network and in Underwater Sensor Networks (UWSNs) acoustic signals are used for communication from one node to another. 
Due to very fast attenuation the radio signals cannot work effectively in underwater that's why the acoustic signal is used because of its reliability, transmitting or receiving signals in all directions and cost free. 
The UWSN has gained great attention of researcher area because of its uses for the variety of purposes like environmental monitoring, disaster prevention, pollution monitoring, resource investigation etc. 
The UWSNs contains two objects sink and underwater sensor nodes. 
These underwater sensors are capable for sensing and collecting data from underwater environment and using routing protocol for the transmission of sensed data to the surface sink. 
There are two main types of transmissions in UWSN, direct transmission mode and multiple hop transmission mode. 
Whenever the path between node and sink is straight, then they directly send data towards sink without forwarding data to other neighbor nodes but when the path between sensor node and sink is not straight then hop by hop transmission method is used. 
Two type of sinks are used in UWSN, static sink and mobile sink. Static sinks are installed on the water surface. 
The main weakness in static sink is that those underwater sensor nodes which are installed closely to the surface sink will die first because of unbalanced energy load and also forwarding more data packets than the high depth nodes. 
These closely deployed sensor nodes to the surface sinks creates problems for routing in UWSN due to their unbalanced load. 
Therefore, mobile sinks are better than static sinks to use in UWSN for getting information from underwater sensor nodes.
The term "Internet of Things" which is presently also well-known as IoT consists of two words. The 'Internet' and 'Things'.
The first word 'Internet' is the worldwide public network system which is used to connect together millions of different types of computers all over the world by using the suit of standard communications Internet protocol (TCP/IP); while the second word 'Things'can be any object, device and appliances that are connected together through the network and communicate with each other. 
For communication, the devices in IoT are made up of actuators, sensors, transceivers and processors. 
Sensors and actuators are devices which provide services for interaction with the physical environment. Sensor is embedded in the device which is used for the data collection. 
This data is then stored and processed intelligently for the purpose of getting useful information from it. 
An actuator is a device that does a specific action according to a signal received form the sensor. 
The sensors detect an event and then actuators perform an action.
The IoT devices have capability to collect information by sensing the data from environment and then use this data for storage and processing. 
These abilities of IoT objects are also limited by the available resources because of limitation of the size, power, energy and computational capability. 
These limited resources are the main issues in UWSNs and also research challenge in IoT to make sure that receiver get the correct data and high level of accurate data from IoT devices. 
Another main research challenge is the communication in IoT devices. 
The IoT devices are normally installed at large geographical areas and that's why the transmission of data between these IoT devices is wireless. 
The main disadvantage of the wireless signals is that they have very high rates of distortion and unreliability. 
This is an important challenge in IoT to communicate data without too much retransmission of data and thus communication technologies.
There are different technologies that involve for implementation of the idea of IoT, which are:
Radio frequency identification (RFID)
Near field communication (NFC)
The Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is a technology which sends the identification information of a device or an object to a reader by using wireless communication. 
With the help of RFID readers, people can monitor, track and identify automatically any objects or device attached with RFID tags. 
The RFID system is basically divided into three different categories. 
These three categories are divided on the basis of power source facility in RFID tags: Active, Passive and Semi Passive RFID. 
RFID consist of different objects these are tags, readers, access controller, server, antenna, software. 
RFID used for different purposes such as monitoring of patient health and military operations etc. (Moeinfar et.al 2012)
Near-Field Communication (NFC) is a very short-range RF based set of communication protocol. 
NFC technology is very similar to RFID technology that's why it is also known as a subset of RFID technology. 
It only works with very short about four inches distances, NCF technology is becoming very famous now a days because it makes the things very simple and easy in our daily life that's why maximum electronics like smartphones are using the features of NFC. 
NFC is very power- efficient protocol for communication. NFC devices has an ability to perform both as a tag and reader. 
There are two types of devices in NFC. Initiator and target. 
Initiator device is used to initiate and generate the RF signals for the communication while target device is used to get information from initiator and use this information for peer to peer communication. 
NFC technology is widely used in many fields such as health caring, contactless card payment, easy usability, transportation and for social media.
In IoT architecture there is no specific agreement which is approved universally. Researchers have been suggested various types of architectures for IoT and divided into different layers. 
There are many concepts have been suggested to create different layers IoT architectures which is based on the selected technology, technical requirements and needs of business. 
The most basic architecture is divided into three different layers IoT (Weyrich et.al 2016). Perception layer, Network layer, and Service layer or application layer as shown in Figure 2(a).
The perception is also called physical layer which consist of sensors. 
These sensors sense and gather information about surrounding area.
The network layer of IoT is used for linking many other smart objects or things, devices in the network and servers. 
It performs also responsibilities of sending and processing sensed data in network.
The responsibility of application layer is to manage the services delivery to the network user. 
Application layer describes many applications through which the IoT can be installed. e.g. smart cities, smart homes and smart water system.
The main idea behind the concept of IoT is provided by three-layer architecture which is not enough for researchers because the advanced features of IoT are getting more attention of researchers and for this purpose they proposed other different layered architectures for IoT. 
According to the International Telecommunication Union the IoT architecture is basically divided into five different layers (Zaheer et.al 2012): perception, transport, processing, application, and business layers as shown in Figure 2(b). 
The functions of perception layer and application layer is same as the architecture of three layers. 
The rest of three layers are defined as:
In transport layer the data of sensor nodes in perception layer transfers to the processing layer through different type of networks such as wireless network, Bluetooth, 3G, RFID and LAN.
In IoT five-layer architecture the processing layer is responsible for managing the large amount of data by analyzing, processing and storing which is gained from transport layer.
it use the services of different technologies such as processing of big data, database processing and cloud computing.
The IoT whole system is managed by business layer, including applications, profit and business elements and user confidentiality.
Communication medium: Radio signals are used in TWSNs for communication because the absorption rate of radio signals between the sensor nodes is very less in TWSNs environment.
Transmission speed: The transmission speed between the sensor nodes of TWSNs is 200000 times more than UWSNs.
Transmission range: The transmission range of TWSNs is 10 times less than UWSNs. The transmission rate of TWSNs is very high than UWSNs transmission rate. 
Recharge difficulties: In TWSNs, the recharging of sensor nodes is not very difficult when we compare it with UWSNs because the sensor nodes are deployed in dry land.
Flexibility: The sensor nodes in TWSNs are fixed or static in nature. They are deployed in specific location for sensing the its specific surrounded area.
Consistency:  The rate of data packet delivery between the sensor nodes in TWSNs is high as compared to UWSNs because in TWSNs the signal interference between the sensor nodes is less than UWSNs environment.
Storage: TWSNs environment need less memory or storage space for transmission between the sensor nodes.
Energy: TWSNs needs less power or energy for data transmission because radio signals convers short distance.
Cost: The cost of TWSNs sensors is inexpensive because these sensors can be used without any protection.
Communication medium: UWSNs used acoustic signals for communication because the absorption rate of acoustic signals is more than radio signals.
Transmission speed: The transmission rate of UWSNs is also very slow than TWSNs because UWSNs use a narrow bandwidth.
Transmission range: The transmission range of UWSNs is more than TWSNs. 
Due to the high rate of absorption in underwater environment, the signals transmission between the sensor nodes is at very low frequency rate. 
So, collision occurred during the transmission because of very low transmission rate is challenging task in UWSNs.
Recharge difficulties: In UWSNs, the sensor deployed in underwater environment so the recharging and replacement of the sensor nodes in underwater is very difficult in UWSNs.
Flexibility: The sensor nodes in UWSN are dynamic in nature. These sensors have an ability to change their location according to underwater environment.
Consistency: The consistency in UWSNs is very low and unbalanced. The rate of data packet delivery between the sensor nodes in underwater environment is very slow. 
The underwater environment noises are comprised of numerous complex problems such as movement of ships and waves etc. so the consistency is the major issue in UWSNs.
Storage: UWSNs environment require more memory or storage space for transmission between the sensor nodes because in underwater environment, the acoustic signals connection may be disable when the area become less than 100 meters. 
Energy: The acoustic signals in UWSNs cover large distance as compared to radio signals in TWSNs. So, the energy requirement in UWSNs is more than TWSNs. 
Cost: The cost of UWSNs sensors is expensive than TWSNs sensors because UWSNs sensors need more protection and their difficult transceivers. 
The IoT enabled with UWSNs are mostly used for exploring and monitoring the underwater environment with the help of IoT smart technologies. 
The smart sensor nodes are used in UWSNs with the IoT smart technologies (Tariq et.al 2020).
Due to very fast technological development of sensors there are a lot of new sensor technologies are introduced to build very small size and also low cost IoT enabled wireless sensors. 
The developers inspired by these advancements in new technologies to build large IoT enabled UWSNs environment for a many application such as environment monitoring, oil extraction, disaster controlling, underwater extraction of oil and gas, military defense etc (Cheema et.al 2017). 
The underwater sensor nodes collect data from its area and then transmit the sensed data to the sink. 
The rate of absorption of electromagnetic signals is very high in water, so acoustic signals are used for communication in underwater environment. 
Data communication in the acoustic medium faces various difficulties due to unusual features of the underwater environment such as, limited bandwidth, packet broadcasting delay, high deployment cost etc. (Garcia et.al 2011). 
Many energy efficient protocols have been recommended to improve the network lifetime with optimum power consumption and also minimize transmission delay from the sensor nodes to surface sinks by using direct or multihop data transmission methods.
UWSNs are prone to issues like difficult replacements of nodes/sinks, less processing capability, less network lifetime, and energy consumption. 
Enhancing the lifetime of UWSN by reducing energy consumption and processing is a research issue. 
To address some of the above-discussed issues IoT capabilities are adopted in collaboration with UWSNs. 
DBR is considered a popular scheme in the domain of UWSNs routing. 
It focuses only on underwater nodes' depth, and no consideration of other parameters like processing and data storage at the sink level. 
As it is tough to replace the nodes/sink in UWSN, it is required that processing at the sink node and data storage at the base station be reduced. 
This can be possible if the characteristics of IoT to be enabled with the architecture of UWSNs because the existing networks work without consideration of the features of today's internet. 
Hence, the processing, analyzing, and availability of data was limited. A new routing method is needed, which can incorporate the features of IoT with UWSNs.
Based on our problem statement leading to designing a new IoT enabled routing scheme, we expect the following objectives to achieve.
To enhance the UWSN routing characteristics by adopting the features that 
IoT analyzes a large amount of data much easily
IoT processes massive data sets much quicker and 
Storage of large data sets and availability everywhere is another IoT feature that can be utilized (Zaheer et.al 2012).
To reduce the load on sinks so that their lifetime is extended.
To compare the proposed technique with DBR protocol based on energy consumption, network lifetime, and packet delivery ratio using MATLAB simulation tool.
Depth Based Routing (DBR) protocol focuses only on depth as the parameter. 
We are designing an IoT-enabled routing scheme to cover two issues, that less energy consumption can be done and path losses can be covered and these two parameters are not considered by DBR protocol. 
The proposed method will enhance the energy consumption as well as path losses, as it is quite common in underwater communication.
When sink nodes receive data and store in their internal memory which is limited storage memory. 
The new scheme will use cloud for data storage and data processing with the help of IoT services, which will be more helpful for better utilization and analysis of the sensed data (Zaheer et.al 2012) in UNWNs.
Much reduced working of surface sinks because the major computation, filtering and storage will be the responsibility of cloud.
UWSNs are used to sense the data in underwater environment for various purposes such as monitoring of pollution, management of oil reserves, prevention of disaster and sampling of ocean. 
The UWSNs use different routing schemes for the transmission of sensed data to the surface sinks and the base stations. 
Due to high propagation delay and low bandwidth, the energy consumption of sensor nodes is major issue for the lifetime of UWSNs. 
In order to increase the lifetime of UWSNs, the new proposed method will design by using the IoT features in UWSN.
The term "Internet of Things," commonly known as IoT, is composed of two words.
The number of social media websites on the internet has increased dramatically. 
Users give data not just through discussion and personal notes but also on a large scale by sharing what they think and feel about products, services, concerns, events, and rules in E-commerce websites and a large volume of user-generated data. 
This is known as user opinion or review, and it seeks to determine the writers or speakers mood or attitude. 
As a result, user-generated data has emerged as a critical source for business intelligence decision-making, assisting enterprises in improving their products. 
Furthermore, shoppers may find it beneficial to read the evaluations of other customers to help them make up their minds about purchasing specific products before making a purchase. 
The sentiment is the expression of people's good or negative feelings towards a product or event. 
Sentiment analysis (S.A.), often known as opinion mining, is a natural language approach for analyzing people's feelings about a product or issue B. Pangand L. Lee (2008). 
The goal of S.A. / Polarity is to automatically analyze an online document, such as a blog, remark, review, or other new things, and describe the attitude as positive, negative, or neutral B. Pangand L. Lee (2008), supplying information on a company or organizations products M. Ghiassi et al (2013), automatically product summaries or outlines in reviews, and even predicting the stock market in online purchase sites M. Ghaissi et al (2013). As seen in figure 1, S.A. can be considered as a classification process. 
There are three levels on which S.A. can be conducted, according to refs B. Liu and W. Medhat et al (2012, 2014).
Level of document: This method treats the entire document (e.g. a comment or review) as a single fundamental information unit, categorized as positive, negative, or neutral. 
However, in some circumstances, the conclusions produced by this method are incompatible. For example, a document that positively recognizes a specific item does not imply that the author has solely favourable ideas about all aspects of that thing. 
Similarly, a document that has adversely identified a thing does not mean that the author disapproves of all aspects of the item. 
Authors frequently express favourable and unfavourable feelings about a specific item and its attributes. 
Sentence level: this method aims to establish the opinion stated in each sentence by splitting the document into sentences and treating each sentence as an independent piece of information. The first step is to determine whether a sentence is subjective or objective and whether it conveys a positive or negative view.
Aspect level: This method uses a fine-grained analysis to discover significant aspects and entities of a given item and then expresses sentiment/polarity toward each one. 
Part refers to a feature of a specific item, such as the battery life of a mobile phone. 
The primary challenge with S.A. is categorizing sentiment polarity B. Liu, and W. Medhat et al. (2012, 2014). 
In general, several studies in S.A. have been done to classify a given textual material in terms of its opinions, using polarity features such as part-of-speech (POS) tags S. Sarkar et al. and V.S Subrahmanian (2008, 2012). 
These researches aimed to offer machine learning models for sentiment polarity categorization based on polarity features. 
After training and testing the proposed models (Deep Neural Network, Artificial Neural Network and Support Vector Machine), compare accuracy and error rate through Mean Square Error and Accuracy. 
At last, we have gained a model with good accuracy and the most minor error rate (didn't get its meaning).
Sentiment analysis is a viewpoint of the people about different things like products, events, services and politicians. 
People reviews are very important for organization owners and also their customers. 
The company owners take the review of people about their product on serious mode because they take action and solve that issues. 
Also helpful for regular online customers, they can easily or quickly understand the products. Usually, millions of reviews are generated daily basis. 
The main focus of this work is to design an automatic mechanism /system which can summarize hundreds of reviews in a few seconds. 
For example, 1500 people give negative comments about mango juice and 1500 give positive comments, and some give neutral comments. 
All the comments are mixed. 
It is very difficult for the owner to check these comments. 
Our polarity based system can summarize the overall comments and provide us with results in a few seconds. 
We use three machine learning models (Deep Neural Network, Artificial Neural Network and Support Vector Machine) to check the performance of these models through MSE and accuracy. Consumers prefer to purchase things online, but they read reviews left by other customers before doing so. 
Customer reviews play a vital role in their purchasing decisions. 
Customers post feedback in the language of their choice. 
In Pakistan, reviews are typically written in Roman Urdu. 
Roman Urdu is a free-flowing, unstructured text. 
The main focus of this work is to design an automatic system for online customers such that they can easily understand the feedback of people about such products within seconds. 
The number of unmeaningful remarks in the review list can be seen in the customer reviews. Another issue is that negative words can completely flip the polarity of an evaluation, necessitating the identification and categorization of those comments. 
This research work aims to identify polarity in Roman Urdu comments by using machine learning techniques such as Deep Neural Network, Artificial neural network, and Support Vector Machine. 
In addition, after achieving the results compare these results with each other to find out the highest accuracy between them.
To design a mechanism for polarity identification in Roman Urdu Reviews using Deep Neural Network, Artificial Neural Network and Support Vector Machine techniques are used. (mention what datasets we are going to use)
To evaluate the performance of this mechanism in terms of MSE and Accuracy.
The first chapter introduces the topic, describes the various difficulties of Roman Urdu reviews, defines the problem statement and objectives, and shows how these goals are addressed in this research work.
Chapter 2 looks at how sentiment analysis can be done using Boolean rules with machine learning approaches. 
In addition, the granularity of research has been covered document, phrase and attributes level analysis. 
The various feature weighting strategies and techniques to data normalization utilized in Text preprocessing are also discussed.
In Chapter 3, the authors present experimental data showing how suitable feature engineering can increase the accuracy of Roman Urdu sentiment analysis accuracy. 
Also, define the proposed work step by step process the plan work well be done.
According to cellular anatomy, a cell is considered the primary structural, functional and biological unit of all living things, which executes all the processes of life (Han et al.,2014).
Many important biological functions such as exchange of biomolecules, energy conservation, excretion, respiration, growth and reproduction are performed by cell for the survival of living organisms. 
The organisms can be widely be grouped  into two types namely prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 
The living beings created from prokaryotic cells are known as prokaryotes for instance blue green algae, bacteria and protozoans. 
While the living beings composed of eukaryotic cells are called eukaryotes for example all other unicellular and multicellular organisms such as algae, plants and animals. 
The cells show diversity in size, shape and internal structure based on their function. The cell’s size can vary ranging from 1μm (micro meter) to 5μm, in case of eukaryotic cells while greater than 50μm in case of prokaryotic cell. 
They possess oval, spherical, polyhedral, spindle and cylindrical shapes according to the functions they carry out. 
Cell is the simplest but most complex unit of life that consists of various structural components called organelles. 
These organelles execute the particular operation in that cell. 
For example, nucleus is called the central unit of  eukaryotes cell that controls all the genetic information (Jackson,D.A,2012). 
In some organism this is also present in the mitochondria, mithochondria  is actively involved in process of fusion and fission (Picard, M et al.,2011), and so on so forth.
In the past decades, many research scientists in the world have paid their attention towards machine learning applications in various domains (Tzanis,G et al.,2006). 
Some of the broad range applications include data mining, computer vision, pattern recognition, robot control, fraud detection, speech recognition, empirical sciences acceleration (Mitchell,T.M,2006) and other modern domains such as bioinformatics, genetics and genomics (Libbrecht, M.W and W.S Noble,2015).
In twenty first century bioinformatics has become an emerging field of computational and molecular biology (Clacerie et al., 2006). 
Bioinformatics uses mathematics and statistical knowledge to analyze and interpret biological data. 
Biological data may either be in form of sequences or 3-D structure. 
Thus, bioinformatics deals with development of applications using machine learning techniques for understanding un-annotated data (Khan et al., 2016). 
Now a days, scientists, work in this domain from broad spectrum. 
However, the scope of our study is limited to design an intelligent computational system that identify Splicing sites from large amount of genome data.	
DNA is found in the nucleus of living organisms and is the essential part of cell. 
A DNA molecule is formed by the combination of thousands of units or monomers. 
These units or monomers are known as nucleotides. Adenine nucleotide, Cytosine nucleotide, Thymine nucleotide and Guanine nucleotide are four types of nucleotides. DNA structure was designed by James Watson and Francis Crick In 1953 (Watson  and Crick,2003). 
Double helix terminology is mostly used for the description of the DNA structure. 
Like a twisted ladder it is made of two strands that are wind around each other as shown in the figure1.1.
DNA has a double twisted helix, which is running in opposed direction. 
According to Watson and Crack model, the base pairs A must be paired with T and G must be paired with T as shown in Figure 1.1. 
DNA is responsible for the transmission of heredity characteristics from parent’s cell to their offspring’s. 
During the proteins synthesis DNA play a vital role by producing messenger RNA (mRNA) which give the message for the synthesis of required protein molecule.  Replication is an important property of DNA; in which DNA makes copy of itself. During the cell division process, replication is crucial procedure because the newly formed cells require having the same copy as the parent DNA molecule.
All the information in a particular DNA is stored in the form of codes, made up of these four basic chemical bases or nucleotides. 
Human DNA contains approximately three billion of these chemical bases, and above than 99% of these bases remains similar in all humans. 
Just like, the letters and alphabet combine together in different manners and from meaningful sentences; these bases determine the available message for making and maintaining an organism. 
A salient feature of DNA is that it has an ability to replicate, or make multiple copies of itself. Each strand of DNA can serves as pattern for duplicating bases sequence. 
This is very critical at the time of cell division, because, dividend cell requires having an exact copy of the parent cell DNA. 
Inside the cell there are also residing macromolecules, which comprises of twenty unites called amino acids (Qi et al., 2003). 
This composition of protein’s amino acids is determined by the DNA sequence. DNA is the responsible body for carrying out the information to build proteins, while the ribonucleic acid (RNA) is practically involved in protein synthesis. 
Therefore, in molecular biology it is considered to be the central dogma, because, there is a closed relationship among DNA, protein and RNA (Crick, 1970). 
The nucleotides sequence encodes genetic information to synthesize proteins. 
Now the DNA containing information is transferred to the messenger RNA (mRNA) during the process called transcription. 
Figure.1.2 shows the genetic flow followed by the translation process to build proteins from mRNA.
The transmission of hereditable information from parents to daughter cells is carried out during the cell division. 
In cell division, the parent’s cell is divided into daughter cells, which is further divided into two sub parts mitosis and  meiosis.
It is an important cell division process in which all the contents of cell including chromosomes are copied from parent cell to daughter cell. In this process of mitosis, two identical daughter cells are formed. 
Meiosis is the second type of cell division which is a two-step process. Chromosomes of parent’s cell is divided into half, i.e. from 46 to 23, in the first phase of meiosis. 
In the second phase, sperm and egg cells are united to form the same number of chromosomes as their parents.
In prokaryotes, genetic information is scattered and encoded in a continuous manner throughout the DNA strand. 
In the case of eukaryotes (single or multi-cell), there is a central nucleus that retains genetic material. 
This genetic material consists of introns and exons (Krane, 2003). 
The exon (join expression) is the coding region, while the intron (nested sequence) is unencrypted, which always intersects the exon sequence. 
In most eukaryotes, the basic RNA text is modified during transcription and this modification step is called binding. 
A typical binding process involves intron/intron removal and the remaining exons are recorded from a contiguous mRNA strand. 
Their chemical and physical pathways are shown in Figure 3.1. 
The bound mRNA is then prepared and exposed from the nucleus for conversion to different types of amino acids. 
The length and number of introns are different between different species and between genes of the same species. 
The minimum length of the intron is approximately 60 pairs to accommodate the binding signal (Krane, 2003). 
There are different types of introns, but the only thing involved in protein coding is the intron. 
Between successive introns and exons, there is a boundary line called a paste position. An upstream or downstream of an intron can be particular splice site.
The donor site donor site (5 splice sites)  is called upstream and the downstream is called the scepter site (3 splice sites). 
Donor sites and approvers are usually classified according to GT-AG rules. U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6 are small nuclear RNAs which are associated with more than three hundred proteins from molecules called splicesomes, which are responsible for identifying donor sites and acceptor (Hoskins and Moore, 2012). 
Splicesome removes the introns after detecting splice site with the help of two consecutive transesterification reactions(Figure 1.3). 
Thus, in gene expression, complete eradication of introns from precursors that deliver each RNA (pre-messenger RNA), as well as integration of the form of residual exons into mature RNA, is a prominent step. 
In order to accurately study the binding procedure, essential part is to identify the junction sites precisely in the gene sequence.
The implications of genetic linking are important for the processing of genetic information. 
This process is an important factor for protein diversity and therefore allows for increased coding capacity of a single gene. 
Therefore, it is required in advance to accurately predict the linking sites in their genome to understand the mechanism of linking between sites. 
Traditional and typical experimental and biochemical methods have many limitations; these methods may not yield sufficient results, and sometimes even fail due to some underlying and intrinsic complications in the sample. 
Therefore, it is not enough to rely solely on these methods. 
These traditional approaches exist many flaws and also contain a lot Fundamentally limitations. 
The arduous, time-consuming, high and costly nature are among these disadvantages. This is why their feasibility rate is lower, and mostly does not apply. 
Thus with increasing DNA / RNA sequence exponentially, it remained significant.
The challenge to give an alternative arithmetic method arises to predict its proper. 
In extensions, these methods may result in a consistent and automated model for rapid prediction of link sites. 
In this regard, in the literature for it, a series of attempts have been reported. 
Different ways of identifying these sites have been introduced, and various significant outcomes have been attained. 
But still comprise a large free space to accommodate more improvements such as its identification performance and some other parameters. 
Thus to fill this void, current research is carried out to develop one ideal model for locating links, which are free from the flaws and limitations discussed above.
The expected outcomes of our proposed model are as following:
To design an automatic, fast and robust identifier using computational intelligent techniques that will be helpful for medicinal drugs, genomics and academic research.
To identify splicing sites receptors and donors with low error rates from genome sequences using proposed model.
To compare the current model with other models in terms of accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and MCC.
Molecular biology has been at a hot spot due to its rapid technological advancement. DNA sequences are increasing every day in the Database . 
Therefore, the interpretation and prediction of these raw data has become a major challenge in the field of computational biology and bioinformatics.
The theme of current research is to identify binding sites in DNA samples using a variety of machine learning techniques. 
Different media biotypes were found in these sequences, so we can easily identify binding sites. 
However, the most difficult step in the machine learning approach is to obtain real digital descriptors from DNA samples and the discriminative power of Extracted features will be utilize to identify link sites accurately. 
Therefore this model plays a significant rule in splice site identification in order assist medical researchers.
Chapter No.1 of the thesis presents a complete description about DNA, cell division, chromosomal crossing over and splicing sites. 
Problems statement and research objectives have been presented at the end of chapter.
Literature review of the related work about DNA sequence  is presented in Chapter 2. The literature survey carried out discloses that splicing is the key element for genetic variations. 
Its identification through traditional approaches is time-consuming and laborious and thus the need of computational methods increases.
The methods and materials used in this research study have been discussed in detail in Chapter 3. 
It includes dataset collection, feature extraction strategies, classification algorithms, evaluation criteria and proposed model. 
In Chapter 4, the results calculated through various classification algorithms using different features extraction strategies for dataset have been discussed and the results are shown through Tables and also graphical represented.
The last and final Chapter 5 of the thesis gives a final conclusion and the major achievements of this research study. It also discusses the future recommendations.
Higher education plays a pivotal role in the economy building of a nation. 
For that various monitoring and regulatory bodies exists that evaluate the quality of education in Higher Education Institution (HEI) by evaluating multiple parameters. 
HEIs focus on improving the quality of education by using various quality assurance techniques and tools.
The quality assurance in HEI in general and particularly in Pakistan requires allocation of appropriate budget to the HEI in the area of engineering and research and also to hunt the talent for scholarships abroad.    
To achieve the target of the desired quality of education in HEI’s Pakistan, the early stage evaluation of the student’s results and academic background are the key parameters to proactively focus on the weak areas of the students and to fill the gaps where improvement is required and to ultimately produce quality graduates.
Multiple techniques are used to evaluate and predict student academic performance i.e Naïve Bayes Classification, K-nearest neighbors, support vector machine, Decision trees, Neural Network etc, There is huge amount of data in higher education institution which is stored in a local data base system. 
Due to information technology we can use that data for decision making by university management. 
The data can be used for a variety of purposes such as predicting the performance of students. Student’s academic performance based on their external as well their internal assessment of a student can be checked. 
Their grade can also predicted that whether a students performance is going to be satisfactory or otherwise in the near future. 
To analyze student historical data a technique education data mining (EDM) (Kamal et al., 2012) is used in which a researcher can use the historical data to forecast about students’ academic performance. 
EDM is very important for higher education institution for their decision purpose to evaluate and predict student’s performance and make necessary arrangements in a proactive manner.
In this research we are focusing on engineering student’s academic performance according to historical examination data. 
Every teacher teaches course and at the end of semester marks are awarded based on sessional marks, quizzes, assignment, attendance class participation, midterm marks and final term exams. Marks obtained by student are calculated. 
Obtained marks are converted into a letter grade awarded to the student which show the student academic performance. 
Based on grade in a course their grade point average (GPA) are calculated for a semester. 
GPA is converting of grades into a numerical value. 
So the GPA is the judgment of student academic performance. Every institution has different GPA range. 
Some follow from 0.00 to 4.00 GPA while some universities used 0.00 to 5.00 range GPA. 
If a student GPA is high which show that student academic performance is good. 
If it’s low then it means that there is some improvement, effort and struggle required to achieve the targets for an institution (Ahmad et al., 2008).  
Data mining also known as knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) which refers to mining or extracting information from large amount of data to determine unknown patterns and association useful in decision making. 
Various algorithms and methods like Association rules, Classification, Regression, Neural networks, Clustering, Artificial intelligence, Genetic algorithms, Bayes theorems, Naïve Bayes theorem, K-Nearest neighbors, K- Means, support vector machine etc. are used for knowledge discovery form databases (KDD) (Han and Kamber, 2001). 
In the following, we list and briefly describe some techniques.
Classifications are the mostly applied data mining techniques for prediction purposes. 
It divides data into predefined classes. 
There are many data mining techniques used to predict student performance in classification which are Bayes classification, Naïve Bayes classification, artificial neural network, support vector machine, K-Nearest neighbors, and decision trees etc (Han and Kamber, 2001).
Artificial Neural network methods is used for classifications, predictions, clustering, pattern recognition and feature mining. 
It consists a set of nodes which are neuron/units, which are connected by links. 
Each link has a numeric weight associated with it. Each unit has a set of input links from other units. 
It has a set of output links which goes into other units. 
It has a current activation level, and activation function to compete the activation level in the next time steps. 
It uses the idea of non- linear mapping, the method of parallel processing and the structure of the neural network itself to express the associated knowledge of input and output.
Initially, the application of the neural network in data mining was not optimistic, and the main reasons are that the neural network has the defects of complex structure, poor interpretability and long training time. 
But its advantages such as high affordability to the noise data and low error rate, the continuously advancing and optimization of various network training algorithms. 
Neural networks are becoming very popular with data mining practitioners, particularly in medical research, finance and marketing, this is because they have proven their predictive power through comparison with other statistical techniques using real data set.
There are four types of neural networks.
The best common deep learning algorithms for supervised training of the multilayer perceptron’s know as Back propagation. 
It regards the perceptron back propagation model and the function network as representatives, and mainly used in the areas such as prediction and pattern recognition. 
It is one of the easiest common and operative procedures used for preparation ANN. 
BPNN is mainly used for multilayered networks. 
There are some input layers and hidden layered and output layered. The structure of feed forward neural network(FFNN) is shown in figure 1.1.
Other type of artificial neural network(ANN) is the recurrent neural networks. 
In this type of artificial neural networks has a feed back connections to their previous layers or similar layers node. 
Recurrent neural network be able to simply trained  on the sequential records easily and fastly. The structures of the recurrent neural network is similar as feed forward neural networks but the simply modifications is that the node in the same layers are inter connected. 
Furthermore, The outputs of the RNN is achieved as results of the computation used from input layer to the previous layers(Wang et al., 2011). 
Recurrent neural network have the advantages on the feed forward neural network on storage ability and it can detain the data in memory. 
Recurrent neural network can be applicable on various applications, such as pattern classification control prediction for weather forecasting, generalization and optimization forecasting (Ubeyli et al., 2008).
Moreover, the RNN are the three types i.e  Fully Recurrent neural network, Elman neural network(ENN) and Jordan. 
But Elman neural network is the best commonly practice structure amongst all these structure. Elman neural network has the top training performance structures of all these. 
And due to the best performance results, many scholars used this type of  structure. 
Similarly, this research study also suggested ENN structure for the study. Moreover, In next section the Elman neural network is describe in details.
An Elman network is three-layer network architecture which is one of the most commonly and well known architecture used by mainly researcher. 
In feed forward neural network the data is go into to the network as an input layer and input layers forwarded the same data to next neighbor layers which is the hidden layers in Omni directions and the hidden layer then forward for output layer. 
Recursive neural network use as a feedback network to the previous layer of neuron with feedback link.
The drawback of the feed forwarded then the development of the new techniques recursive and most commonly used algorithms as Elman neural networks. 
In which, there is a feed forward direction as well as feedback forward facility both in one algorithm which is known as ENN in which there is input layer the data is forwarded to the hidden layer with feed back from hidden layers to an extra layers is also named as a context layers. 
At each time the input is fed forwarded from hidden layer to context layer and learning rule is applied in that layer. 
The feedback connections save a copy of the previous values of the hidden neurons output from hidden layer is forwarded in the context layer (Elman 1990) and return back some neuron again to hidden layer. 
Some specific neurons/units in the next context layer receives a replica of the output of all hidden nodes. 
The context layer neurons values is used as a time delay some extra inputs for all the units in the hidden layers. 
That is why, this networks contain of an open memorial of one time delay . 
Consequently, this research, there are three layers of ENN are used. 
Three layers structures comprise of an input layers, hidden layers or context layers, and output layer. 
Each layers of the structures has it own index variables i.e input layer neurons “i” index values is used while for output layer nodes and hidden layer nodes the index variables are “k”, “j”, “l” are used respectively. 
In this setup feed forward direction there is an input vector which is “X”  directed through weight values “V’ with the hidden layer nodes.
Equation (1.1) is represented as feed forward connections of the Elman neural network from the input layer neurons to the hidden layer neurons.
Where is in equation (1.2) the number of inputs “bj” is a bias. 
In a ENN structures, input vector is broadcast the data from input layers to the hidden layer through a weight values, hidden layer have its own output of the hidden layers in context layers mutual with the previous state activations through an additional repeated weight values “U’ which is denoted in the equation (1.3)
Where in this equation “m" is the numbers of state node. 
And next equation “f" an activation functions at hidden layer and “g” is output activations functions and 〖"W〗_kj” denotes weight values from hidden layers to output layers neuron/units.
Flower pollination algorithm (FPA) developed by Xin-She Yang in 2012.
In nature, the main determination of the plants is reproduction via fertilization. 
Flower pollination is associated to the transmission of pollen, which is accomplished by pollinators such as in birds, insects, bats, and other animals or wind. 
The main problem of a flower pollination is ultimately reproduction via pollination. 
Some flower kinds have distinct pollinators for fruitful pollination.
There are four rules of pollination have been produced on the motivation from flowering plants and they form the main informing equations of the flower pollination algorithm.
One type is Cross-pollination or Biotic pollination it happens from the pollen of a flower of distinct plants. 
In this type of pollination pollens is transfer from one plant to another via birds, insects and bats etc. 90% are happen to this type of pollination.  
This is also well-known as global pollination method.
Self or Abiotic pollination happens from the pollens of the same flower or other flower of the same plant. 
10% pollination are happened to this type of pollination. 
In this type of pollination pollen are transfer through wind or water from one plant to other plant. 
It is also called as local pollination.
For Flower Pollination Algorithms, the following steps are used.
Step 1: Global pollination denoted in biotic and cross pollination as manners, as pollen carrying pollinators fly following Lévy flight.
Step 2: Local pollination denoted in abiotic and self-pollination as the procedure does not require any pollinators.
Step 3: Flower reliability which can be established by insects, which is on a par with a reproduction possibility that is proportional to the resemblance of two flower involved.
Step 4: The collaboration of local pollination and global pollination is measured by a switch probability p∈[0, 1], lightly biased near local pollination.
To create the updating formulas, the overhead rules have to be converted into appropriate updating equations. 
For example at the global pollination step, the pollinator such as insects, birds transfer the flower pollen gametes, so the pollen can mobile over a long distance because of the capability of these insects, birds to fly and travel in much longer ranges. 
Therefore, global pollination steps and flowers constancy steps can be denoted by:
In fact, L(λ) is the Lévy flight based step size that links to the strength of the pollination. 
Since long distances can be covered by insects using various distance steps, a Lévy flight can be used to mimic this behavior efficiently. 
That is, L>0 from a Lévy distribution.
This research work focuses on to investigate the effectiveness of data mining techniques for predicting the graduating grades of the engineering students. 
Artificial neural networks is the best frequently used data mining learning model for classification and prediction. 
Prediction is common application used in various research to predict the graduation students’ grades. 
Among the literature review ENN model which is a sub type of ANN, and flower pollination algorithm are used for prediction. 
However, these key schemes suffer from slow convergence and do not provide sub optimal solution. 
To solve such problem, we proposed a hybrid model HFPENN which provide optimal solution and enhance the performance to predict the student academic performance.
To develop a hybrid flower pollination and Elman Neural Network (HFPENN) model for grades prediction of university students.
To compare the proposed model HFPENN with Recursive Neural Network (RNN) and Back Propagation Neural network in terms of Mean Square Errors and accuracy.
This research will focuses on the selection and prediction of students’ academic performance based on their historical data. 
The scope is limited to predicting the performance of engineering student’s only. 
Similarly, we limit the scope of historical data to secondary school, higher secondary school, ETEA entrance test marks, first semester and second semester GPA. 
The model can be extended to other universities and subject areas for decision purposes.
This study contributes to the literature knowledge with respect to prediction techniques adopted by various higher education institution to evaluate the academic standards proactively and to provide a business intelligence spectrum for the future planning to get the academic strategic objectives. 
This study will supplement to the quality of education in terms of various parameters defined by the higher education institutions and further to identify the quality gaps before it happens.
The World Wide Web (WWW) is a vast network of information and resources where users can access and search for a wide range of content, including text, images, videos, and audio [1, 2]. 
Web search engines, such as Google and Bing, play a crucial role in helping users find the information they are looking for by processing large amounts of data and presenting relevant results based on their search queries. Search engines have become indispensable tools for Internet users as they allow easy and fast access to information on a global scale. Research has shown that people are becoming increasingly satisfied with the performance of search engines, but at the same time, they are also becoming increasingly concerned about their privacy [3]. 
Using personalization algorithms by search engines to present search results and advertisements tailored to the user’s interests is seen as both a strength and a weakness by different people.
On the one hand, personalized results can provide a more relevant and enjoyable experience for the user. 
On the other hand, it also raises privacy concerns as search engines collect and store large amounts of data about the user’s activities, interests, and behaviours, which could be used for various purposes, including targeted advertising. Web search engines build a user profile based on various factors such as interests, preferences, and previous searches to provide more relevant results. 
This user profile can improve the accuracy of search results but also raises privacy concerns as it reveals sensitive information about the user. 
The user’s profile contains their unique I.D., name, employer’s details, location, and potentially sensitive information such as their health status, political views, religion, etc. [4]. 
As a result, users are often forced to trade off accuracy for privacy, which can result in less relevant search results [5]. Search engines must balance the need for personalized results with user privacy protection.
A survey conducted in 2012 showed that many users were concerned about the privacy implications of web search engines recording their data and search queries [3]. 
The query log, which records users’ search activities, is a valuable resource for search engines as it helps them to provide more relevant results [6]. 
However, the storage of query logs also poses a significant privacy threat, as this data can be disclosed to advertising agencies and media, potentially revealing sensitive information about users. 
The release of the AOL log in 2006, where twenty million queries generated by 658000 users over three months were published, is a well-known example of a privacy breach [7, 8]. 
This incident highlights the need for search engines to implement strong privacy policies and measures to protect user data and ensure users’ privacy.
In some cases, web search engines may be required by court order to disclose individual queries as part of legal proceedings, such as divorce or civil lawsuits. 
These incidents have raised further concerns about the privacy of users’ search data and the security of their personal information. 
The 2014 incident, where 80 million health records were lost by the second-largest insurance company in the U.S., highlights the need for better security measures to protect sensitive information [9, 10]. 
These incidents have sparked a movement for privacy preservation among online community members and have led to questions about the privacy policies of the WSE. 
These incidents put a question mark on WSEs’ policy regarding user privacy. 
So far, many techniques have been proposed to protect users’ privacy during their Web searches. 
These techniques can be classified into five major classes, i.e., distributed techniques, stand-alone methods, query scrambling, third-party infrastructure, and hybrid techniques. 
This chapter overviews the most prominent privacy-aware web search schemes and techniques. 
The classification of these privacy-preserving schemes and solutions is shown in Figure 1.
The chapter’s organization, as described in sections 2, 3, and 4, helps to provide a clear overview of the current state of privacy-aware web search schemes, present a conclusive summary of these schemes, and discuss future directions in this field. 
This structured presentation can make it easier for readers to understand the key concepts and developments in privacy-aware web searches.
Urdu is one of the popular languages in Indo-Pak regions, with more than 100 million speakers worldwide [1, 17h]. 
Urdu is a national and official language of Pakistan and the 22nd utmost verbal language in the whole world [2, 18h]. 
Urdu belongs to the Indo-Aryan language family, and unlike English (Latin or Roman script), Urdu is written from right to left in Perso-Arabic script [3]. 
Apart from the literature, the first-ever Urdu newspaper was "Jam-i-Jahan-Numa," established in 1822 in Kolkatta by Harihar Dutta [8]. 
There are 6723 Urdu newspapers registered between 1957 and 2015 in India [9]. 
In Pakistan, there are 184 newspapers published daily, and most of them are Urdu newspapers. 
With this popularity, many media houses, websites, and social media sites publish News in Perso-Arabic Script to attract readers [4]. 
A vast number of Urdu news documents are generated daily from various platforms in Pakistan and worldwide. Usually, the newsreaders are interested in reading a specific type of News according to their interests. 
For example, considering the political situation, readers would like to have recent News about the ongoing political crisis instead of what's going on in the sports world. 
Similarly, a business person would be most interested in the stock market instead of entertainment. 
In such cases, a reader needs a news aggregation tool to automatically aggregate News from various news sources and cluster them to read the same news category from different sources [6]. 
Previously, researchers have made many attempts to categorize and group Urdu documents using techniques such as Classification [1, 6, 7], Lexicon based categorization [3], Clustering algorithms [4], etc. 
However, the incoming News's automatic classification is challenging, as a news document may simultaneously belong to different classes. 
Therefore, clustering techniques can be effectively used compared to the classification techniques to group the News based on word similarities [5]. 
In this work, we propose a novel approach to cluster the Urdu news documents and facilitate a reader to get news documents automatically of a specific group.
The main contribution of this work includes:
To propose a novel approach called Urdu News Clustering (UNC) to cluster the Urdu news documents using the K-mean algorithm.	
To compute the similarity between the Urdu news documents using the Dice coefficient and Jaccard coefficient similarity measure.
To compute the efficiency of UNC using accuracy and MSE. 
(Khaliq et al. 2015) Proposed and evaluated a novel algorithm to automatically cluster Urdu news based on the news headline of famous Pakistani media houses. 
They experimented the proposed algorithm with the dataset consisting of 500 news documents of different categories like International, National, Health, Business, and Entertainment collected from BBC Urdu, Express, UrduPoint, and Voice of America Urdu (VOA). 
The proposed algorithm used headlines to cluster the News. They developed a crawler that scraps Urdu news from the above mention news agencies. 
An algorithm called get-Related NewsList() was designed with the specific threshold variable to identify similar News based on the token matching between two given news headlines. 
The experimental evaluation showed that their proposed algorithm achieved 0.45 average micro precision 0.45 and 0.48 average macro precision when computing similarity between news headlines. 
The result looks far better than a random probability for precision. Therefore, the proposed algorithm clustered similar News based on the headlines[6].
(Usman et al. 2016) presented a technique with a MAX VOTING method to succeed with higher accuracy. 
To categorize News into five pre-defined classes such as business, science, health, culture, sports,  and entertainment, they used Linear SVM / SDG, Multinomial / Bernoulli Naïve Bayes, Naïve Bayes, and random forest machine learning algorithms for classification. 
Their methodology contained a step by step process to collect Urdu news documents, apply preprocessing methods like stopwords removal, tokenization, and stemming for feature collection.  
The results depicted that the MAX VOTING method provided 0.942% precision and 0.944% recall, and 0.943 F-measure [2].
(Arif et al. 2016) solved word sense disambiguation problem for Urdu language text. 
However, this work on  Urdu is still in-progress or not yet adequately accomplished. Urdu language is prevalent and has many shapes based on speaking within the country. 
It is challenging to decide which method of English Language can be useful for Urdu as well.  
Many works have been done on Urdu Language documents to remove ambiguity from the words that show the ambiguous meaning using the SVM standard library. 
Arif et al. have proposed two types of procedures for identification and decreasing purposes for sensing disambiguation. The ambiguity detection is performed by the lexicon ambiguity method. 
The specific collection of words belongs to Urdu text documents are processed by the identification methods to enhance and overcome the difficulties in the study's desired language. 
SVM and Naïve Bayes algorithms for classification have been tested for sensing ambiguity. 
Outcomes of this study showed that the given SVM performed better as compared to the Naive Bayes algorithm [9].
(Pratama et al. 2017) have used the graph model to represents digital News in a straightforward method. 
This research worked on 200 Indonesian digital news taken from the website and converted into the JSON format. They used the Chinese Whispers Algorithm (CWA) to cluster the Indonesian news documents.  
The CWA algorithm works like a kid game where one kid says some words, and others repeatedly use it. 
The advantage of CWA is that it works faster on big data. Pratama et al.  focused on comparing the intra-cluster and inter-cluster graphs' quality at the node level.  
The results indicated that 95% of nodes have intra-cluster weight higher than its inter-cluster value. Pratama et al. worked on graph accuracy with cluster-based analysis, and the results show that the CWA has 80% accuracy [10].
(Khademi et al. 2017) proposed an unsupervised technique to cluster Persian news documents. 
A novel mixture mechanism was adopted in the given procedure to simplify the text clusters using deep learning approaches. 
The proposed method worked on Persian news text summarization and produced a word embedding based on the Hamshahri2 corpus and a dictionary of word frequencies [10h, 11]. 
The News was from different fields, such as cultural, political, social, etc. 
In the proposed method, Khademi et al.  determined the importance of sentences using multiple related words instead of a single word by analyzing the semantic and syntactic similarities. 
Khademi et al.   used  ROUGE 2.0 (Java implementation) tool for experimentation. 
This method achieved a competitive performance; recall scores for system summaries generated with a 25% compression ratio on Pasokh corpus are 0.27 [11].
(Anwar et al. 2019) presented authorship identification in English and Urdu text using the LDA model with n-grams texts and cosine similarity. 
The proposed approach used similarity metrics to identify various learned representations of stylometric features and identify a particular author's writing style. 
The proposed LDA-based approach emphasizes instance-based and profile-based classifications of an author's text. 
Here, LDA suitably handles high-dimensional and sparse data by allowing a more expressive representation of text. 
The presented approach is an unsupervised computational methodology that can handle the dataset's heterogeneity, diversity in writing, and the Urdu language's inherent ambiguity. 
A large corpus has been used for performance testing of the presented approach. 
The experiments' results show the superiority of the proposed approach over the state-of-the-art representations and other algorithms used for authorship identification. 
The presented work's contributions are the use of cosine similarity with n-gram-based LDA topics to measure similarity in text documents' vectors. 
Achievement of overall 84.52% accuracy on PAN12 datasets and 93.17% accuracy on Urdu news articles without using any labels for authorship identification task is done [14].
(Munir et al. 2019) experimented with topic modeling approaches with Urdu poetry's text to show that these approaches perform equally well in any text genre. 
They applied Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), Hierarchical Dirichlet Process (HDP), and Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) on three datasets (i) CORPUS dataset for News, (ii) Poetry Collection of Dr. Allama Iqbal, and (iii) Poetry collection of miscellaneous poets. Each poetry corpus consisted of approximately five hundred poems in a total of 1200 poetry documents. 
They performed featured engineering comprising of (i) Tokenization and removal of special characters (if any), (ii) Removal of stop words, (iii) Lemmatization, and (iv) Stemming. 
For comparison of the mentioned approaches on their test samples, they used the coherence and dominance model. 
Their experiment showed that LDA and LSI performed well on the CORPUS dataset for News, but none of the mentioned approaches performed well on poetry text. 
Results brought them to the conclusion that they needed to devise sequence-based models that allow users to correctly classify the poetry text[15].
The rest of the paper is organized as: section 2 represents the background and notations used in this paper, section 3 explains the methodology adopted in the implementation of this work. 
Section 4 details the results and discussions of this paper, followed by the conclusion and future work in the last section.
The innovations brought by technology in the field of agriculture have changed the social and political stability of a nation and has a great impact on the outsourcing of agricultural products. 
As the societal revenue of these products is substantial, this leads to inexpensive and plentiful food and promotes the development standards and contributed to the GDP of a country (Alston and Julian 2010). 
In recent years, Agronomics has been significantly assorted and often associated with other activities. 
This significant change is due to different researchers who are working on various aspects of cultivation and generating more knowledge for farmers and enterprises to produce more fruitful results. 
The outdated techniques used by farmers are now shifting towards interactive model of networking system which amalgamates the adoption, and production of knowledge with education and advice for the countryman (Scar, 2012). 
The technological innovation and modification opens up an up to date way of organizing institutional changes. 
Although organizations are slow in adapting changes, but this advancement in technology lead to the cultural, social and economic growth of a country (Smith et al., 2010).
Innovation system in agriculture is determined as a system in which different corporations, firms and professionals emphasized on launching new processes, products and patterns of organizational set-up in a cost effective way along with different policies of the organization in order to interact, acquire, discuss and practice knowledge (Leeuwis, 2004).
The association of technical skills in agriculture has a great impact on farmers. 
As there is a vast variety of farmers working in a firm, they can be categorized as part time and professional farmers, diversified, specialized, organic, conventional, men, women, young and old and everyone has a different view about adoption of technology as they have their own ethics and motivations (Scar, 2012). 
New technological techniques play an important role in our interaction with the agricultural lands. 
Using moisture sensors, plants moisture content can be detected and monitored through a computerized system. 
Traditionally, achieving the optimum water content has been time-consuming, involving constant plant monitoring, expensive, due to excessive power use, and inefficient, through unnecessary over-watering. 
Now with the arrival of moisture sensors, it is much easier to detect the moisture content of the soil with respect to a particular plant and this will be implemented through wireless sensor network so that growers have a convenient, relatively low cost, and non-invasive communication means with their crops in order to achieve maximum yield.
The wireless sensor network is responsible to provide and render effective soil moisture data which is based on different events. 
The success factor of this network is assessed by reactivity, and robustness (Cardell et al., 2004).
The technology of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) has emerged from the advancements in the fields of wireless communication, digital electronics, and microelectro-mechanical system technology. 
The devices of WSNs are low in cost, small in size and require minimum power for their work. The structure of WSN sensor as discussed  as: (Chebbi et al., 2005)
A sensor node comprises of four main components. 
It includes a power unit, a transmission unit, a processing unit and a sensing unit. 
As applications vary depending upon its type, sensor node may include some additional components like power generator, mobilize, and position finding system. 
The task of sensing unit is sensing and gathering data from sensor which is then passed to the processor that processes it accordingly. 
The purpose of power unit is to supply power to the sensor node.(Chebbi et al., 2005).
Generally there are two ways of determining the water status of soil. 
One is soil sampling which is known as direct method and the other is soil moisture sensing which is an indirect method of detection of water level. 
In most cases, the direct method is not used because of the irrigation scheduling as they are more troublesome and laborious and is unable to provide immediate feedback. 
On the other hand, using indirect method, the soil moisture sensor probes are placed in soil at prototypical points in the field to impart moisture readings time to time that are useful for irrigation management.
The earlier production of crops was based on farmers to look after their field in all cases. 
Farmers need resources to grow food, it include natural resources, such as land, air, nutrients, water and sunlight. 
They themselves need energy so they can work the land. Farmers need human-made tools to work the land.
With the availability of moisture sensors, gardening is easier, as the involvement of human interaction is replaced by sensors. 
Soil moisture sensing technology assists adaptive irrigation management in providing information on actual plant water use rates. 
The focus on water use efficiencies has become more stringent recently and there is a call for all industries to be accountable for their water use, however the finger has definitely been pointed to the irrigation industries and outdoor water use
In response to a need to offer improved water use efficiency techniques and encourage adoption, Nursery & Garden Industry Australia NGIA has commissioned the Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries to undertake work in assisting adoption of innovative irrigation technologies. 
Nursery & Garden Industry NSW & ACT NGINA Industry Development Officer IDO, explores the use of soil moisture sensors and the ability of these devices to be applied to soilless based containerized nursery production to appropriately monitor and schedule irrigation and hence optimize crop production whilst achieving water use efficiency. 
Soil Hygrometer detection module is used to detect soil moisture when the soil moisture deficit module outputs a high level, and vice versa output low. 
Soil moisture sensors are installed in turf areas across the Gardens and the data is directly fed back to the irrigation control system for monitoring. 
This system has the ability to cease irrigation upon reaching certain set-points in soil moisture. 
This moisture sensor would be perfect for an automated plant watering project.
Organization of data in to different meaningful groups is one of the important and basic modes of learning and understanding of data. 
For example, a basic scheme of scientific division of data puts organism into a system of grouped and ranked data. 
The formal study of methods and procedures for grouped data is cluster analysis, or clustering. 
Cluster analysis is fall into unsupervised learning which does not need any sort of labels or class labels for prior identifications. 
This absence of class labels is actually differentiating supervised and unsupervised learning. 
The basic purpose of clustering is to find some set pattern/structure in data and is thus self explanatory. 
Scientific field has a lot of evidence of clustering and is very usable in different scenarios.
K-Means clustering is one of the most popular and simple clustering algorithm which was first published in the year 1955. 
Beside the fact that this clustering technique was introduced back in 1955, this technique is still widely used and very popular. 
Similarly Self Organizing Map (SOM) is actually the mapping of high-dimensional vectors into smaller dimensional spaces typically along 2-D space. 
One can think of this clustering like K-Mean clustering with the difference that, vectors that are presented very closed to in a high dimensional space also end up being mapped to the nodes which are closed enough in 2-D space.
The hardware of a WSN node comprised of different components that include a sensing hardware which identifies different events and detect changes on the basis of which it shows its output which is further analyzed. 
The second component is the transceiver, which is capable of receiving and transmitting data over Bluetooth technology. 
The third major component is the microcontroller which acts as the CPU of the node that stores and maintains the data, controls the overall communication and read and process data accordingly and finally the source of power which is used to operate the whole unit. (Ali, 2015).
The topology of a network plays an important role in the transmission and reception of data. 
It is actually the logical or physical arrangement of network. 
The success of a network is dependent upon the WSN topology where the data rate, range and energy are crucial elements.
Most frequent topologies that are used in the WSN include Bluetooth which is point to point piconet, ZigBee which have mesh and tree topology, star topology and hybrid technology.
According to the development of tools used for WSN and its strategies is an authoritative task to be carried out. 
The top features of an ideal irrigation system. 
He analyzed that systems are sensitive to changes and these changes may be in terms of moisture content, evaporative demand or response of plant. 
These changes must be accomplished in order to monitor the water content and its maintenance. 
Systems should be reliable, user friendly that requires minimum training, minimizing the efforts of labors and reducing the cost. (Lea-Cox et al., 2010).
Keeping in view the requirements, a more precise WSN is proposed by According to the researcher, sensors should be rapidly deployed by users in production area for reducing cost and enhancing the utility, the network of sensors should be scalable, nodes should consume minimum power or having option of rechargeable power and the data from the sensor should be transmitted to the base station in a more reliable way. The interface should display the data in a more appropriate way that can be easily comprehended and there must be proper decision tools that would provide more flexibility for scheduling. (Lea-Cox et al., 2008).
The content of water in soil can be described by the energy status of water in soil or by its volumetric basis. 
There are pros and cons of both techniques. 
He stated that water availability to plants can be determined by soil metric potential, but it lack the information about the total content which is present in the substrate. Those sensors which are designed to estimate the water content of soil are more reliable than those which only measure the water availability. 
These sensors are good enough for sensing the data, but they have a major drawback. They only sense a small volume of water. 
This issue can be resolved by planning a strategy for sensor placement. (Lea-Cox et al, 2011).
Automated system of WSN is beneficial for minimizing the labor work, reducing the overall usage of water, monitoring and managing the amount of water required for plants. To enhance the yield of agriculture, WSN is one of the cost effective processes. It has been used in various applications like determining the climatic conditions, identifying the nutrients of soil for forecasting the crops health, and quality of products. Irrigation system can be well predicted and planned by the use of WSN including determination of humidity, moisture and temperature. 
There are certain parameters that can be added to further modify and improve the working capability of WSN
Human beings are responsible for the development and production of land in all most all the cases, whatever the conditions may be, whether it is raining, flood, water deficiency, any parasitic attack on crops or some other thing. 
Without human interaction, the net result of crops would be minimum. 
As the maintenance of water content for plants is an important aspect for the better yield of crops. 
Achieving the optimum water content has been time-consuming, involving constant plant monitoring, expensive, due to excessive power use, and inefficient, through unnecessary over-watering. 
Thus in orders to reduce human involvement, Sensors are introduced in agricultural field which aim to introduce new technology in agricultural field to facilitate farmers, growers to get maximum yield, reduce the human efforts, prevention of water lose in current irrigation system, stabilize the economic condition of Pakistan by increasing export business.
The objectives of the study is mentioned below
To analyze and develop a Wireless Sensor Network for irrigation management.
To investigate and design a low cost soil moisture sensor for irrigation management.
To determine the efficient use of water using Wireless Senor Network.
To determine the yield of a farm using Wireless Sensor Network.
To do this research, there will be a significant impact on the irrigation system. Farmers will come to know the advancement in technology that will exceed the yield of their fields. 
Human involvement will be minimized by introducing a computerized monitoring system for plants, which will perform the whole functionality within minimum time, effectively, correctly and efficiently. 
Wireless Sensor Network technology assists in adaptive irrigation management by providing information on actual plant water use rates.








